# Heylighen 2016: "Stigmergy as a universal coordination mechanism"

> *stigmergy is an indirect, mediated mechanism of coordination between actions, in which the trace of an action left on a medium stimulates the performance of a subsequent action.*

> The concept of stigmergy was proposed by the French entomologist Pierre-Paul Grassé (Grassé, 1959) to describe a mechanism of coordination used by insects. **The principle is that work performed by an agent leaves a trace in the environment that stimulates the performance of subsequent work—by the same or other agents. This mediation via the environment ensures that tasks are executed in the right order, without any need for planning, control, or direct interaction between the agents.** The notion of stigmergy allowed Grassé to solve the “coordination paradox” (Theraulaz and Bonabeau, 1999), i.e. the question of how insects of very limited intelligence, without apparent communication, manage to collaboratively tackle complex projects, such as building a nest. 
> The insight came from Grassé’s observation of how termites repair their nest. He noted that initially termites wander around more or less randomly, carrying mud and depositing it here or there. However, the deposits that are created in this haphazard way then stimulate the insects to add more mud in the same place. Thus, the small heaps quickly grow into columns that eventually come together to form an intricate cathedral of interlocking arches. The only communication between the termites is indirect: the partially executed work of the ones provides information to the others about where to make their own contribution.
> With the advent of the agent-based paradigm in computer simulation, insect societies were conceptualized as [[swarm theory|swarms]] of simple agents that are able to perform complex tasks using various forms of self-organization and especially stigmergy (Deneubourg, Theraulaz and Beckers, 1992). The general ability to tackle complex problems exhibited by such self-organizing multi-agent collectives became known as swarm intelligence (Bonabeau, Dorigo and Theraulaz, 1999; Kennedy, 2006). 
> Probably the best-known example of stigmergic self-organization is the “[[capitalism|invisible hand]]” of the market: the actions of buying and selling leave a trace by affecting the price of the transacted commodities. This price in turn stimulates further transactions. 