_See also [[concepts/concepts]], [[conceptual engineering]], [[framing|conceptualization]]_

When we discover a new conceptual distinction, we can only see its possibilities and affordances, the sentences previously unsayable, the progress in our sense of clarity. But the next generation, inheriting it, takes these affordances for granted and can see only the concept's constraints, limitations, its short-selling of the real.

# Okrent 2010, _In the Land of Invented Languages_

Pre-17th C, mathematicians and scientists could only write about mathematics in sentence and paragraph form, e.g. instead of being able to just write x^2, you said shit like "take the aformentioned quantity and multiply it with itself twice." 
> Late-sixteenth-century scientists who were engaged in calculating the facts of the universe had a sense that the important ideas, the truths behind the calculations, were struggling against the language in which they were trapped.
> The development of mathematical notation in this context was nothing short of revolutionary. The notational innovations of the seventeenth century— symbols and variables instead of words, equations instead of sentences—not only made it easier to keep track of which thing was which in a particular calculation; they also made it easier to see fundamental similarities and differences, and to draw generalizations that hadn't been noticed before. 
> In addition, the notation was universal; it could be understood no matter what your national language was. The pace of innovation in science accelerated rapidly. Modern physics and calculus were born. It seemed that the truth was finally being revealed through this new type of language. A tantalizing idea took hold: just imagine what might be revealed if we could express all of our thoughts this way.

## Agre 1985: The Structure of Everyday Life

> I'd go in, I'd get the teabag and put it in the cup, I'd get out the kettle and fill it with water, and I'd put it on the stove. And one day while I was doing all this it occurred to me that I should be putting the water on the stove first and getting the other things out afterward. The next time I went into make tea, I went straight for the kettle, filled it, and put it on the stove. But then I thought hang on, this is an electric stove. The next time out I turned on the electric stove before filling the kettle... waiting for water to boil and waiting for an electric stove to heat up are notorious hassles. By putting names to hassles, you provide yourself with a way of noticing that something is more trouble than it ought to be.