# 2005: Framing 101

> At this point I remembered a paper that one of my students had written some years back that showed that we all have a metaphor for the nation as a family. We have Founding Fathers. The Daughters of the American Revolution. We “send our sons” to war. This is a natural [[analogy|metaphor]] because we usually understand large social groups, like nations, in terms of small ones, like families or communities.

> My work on politics began when I asked myself just such a question. It was back in the fall of 1994. I was watching election speeches and reading the Republicans’ “Contract with America.” The question I asked myself was this: What do the conservatives’ positions on issues have to do with each other? If you are a conservative, what does your position on abortion have to do with your position on taxation? What does that have to do with your position on the environment? Or foreign policy? How do these positions fit together? What does being against gun control have to do with being for tort reform? What makes sense of the linkage? I could not figure it out. I said to myself, These are strange people. Their collection of positions makes no sense. But then an embarrassing thought occurred to me. I have exactly the opposite position on every issue. What do my positions have to do with one another? And I could not figure that out either.

(What he points to tho which I think is right, is that these issues have to be strategically bundled to win elections and create coalitions, and the means by which they are strategically bundled is through strategic conceptual and linguistic framings by party leadership...  That X position is a "family value" or is "progressive" somehow.)