## Miller 2000: The Passion of Michel Foucault

> During the 1980s, a number of Americans working in a university setting enshrined Foucault as a kind of patron saint, a canonic figure whose authority they routinely invoked in order to legitimate, in properly academic terms, their own brand of “progressive ” politics. Most of these latter-day American Foucauldians are high-minded democrats; they are committed to forging a more diverse society in which whites and people of color, straights and gays, men and women, their various ethnic and gender “differences” intact, can never­theless all live together in compassionate harmony—an appealing if dif­ficult goal, with deep roots in the Judeo-Christian tradition. Unfortunately, Foucault’s lifework, as I have come to understand it, is far more uncon­ventional—and far more discomfiting—than some of his “progressive” admirers seem ready to admit. Unless I am badly mistaken, Foucault issued a brave and basic challenge to nearly everything that passes for “right” in Western culture—including nearly everything that passes for “right” among a great many of America ‘s left-wing academics.

In his later life, Foucault indeed turned to a kind of classical liberalism, emphasizing restraint on government intervention:

> But in these 1979 lectures, Foucault introduces an entirely new—and complicating—dimension into his historical view of the nineteenth cen­tury. For liberalism, in stark contrast to Machiavellianism, is defined, as Foucault puts it, by the maxim, “‘one always governs too much’—or at least, it is necessary to suspect that one governs too much.” As a conse­quence of this liberal principle, “governmentality cannot be exercised with­ out a ‘critique.'” Every form of government must be examined, not merely in terms of the goods and well-being it manages to secure for its subjects, but, even more, in terms of the legitimacy of its claim to rule. Why is it necessary for the state to govern any given aspect of life at all?

How did this reputation of the great progressive Michel Foucault come to form?

> How did Foucault come by his reputation for progressivism? Through a series of books—most notably _Madness and Civilization_ (1961) and _Discipline and Punish_ (1975)—that made a case not on behalf of Marxism’s preferred agent of historical transformation, the industrial working class, but rather for that non-class of _lumpenproletarians_ perennially scorned by Marxism, here reconceived by Foucault as those madpeople and criminals subjected to and normalized by modernity’s supposedly humane disciplinary institutions—the asylum, the hospital, the prison. His identification of a new oppressed class, and his observation of oppressive power structures working in precisely those institutions meant in the modern period to correct the “barbarities” of ages past with their torture chambers and ships of fools, would change the western left forever. The “abnormal” subject (rather than the worker) was now the protagonist of history, power (rather than exploitation) the mechanism of oppression, and modern scientific and liberal institutions (rather than capitalist economics) the enemy. (_John Pistelli, commentary_)

In post-War France, Sartre's Marxist, humanist existentialism dominated intellectual life, and Foucault wished desperately to escape its paradigms, turning to Sade, [[Friedrich Nietzsche|Nietzsche]], Heidegger, Bataille, Artaud, and Blanchot for alternate influence.

In his early, influential writings, Foucault began to shift the landscape of leftist concern for oppression from Marx's _workers_ to the "abnormal" subject, the _lumpenproletarians_ of mental illness, queerness, difference, etc.

> Miller notes that these books were not well-received by historians, who found them over-simplified or simply erroneous in detail. Of another of his books, _The Order of Things_ (1966), the work that made him an intellectual star in France to rival Sartre, Foucault himself allowed, “My book is a pure and simple ‘fiction’ […] It’s a novel, but it’s not me who invented it.” (_John Pistelli, commentary_)

In the mid 70s, after his LSD trip in Death Valley (scored by Stockhausen), he got involved in San Francisco's s/M & leather subcultures, shifting his intellectual focus to sexuality.
