by [[Venkatesh Rao]]

> The first things I actually collected were airplanes and stars, as a teenager. Well, information about airplanes and stars. I’d been doing it for several years before I realized what was so addictive about it. It wasn’t bragging rights based on being able to identify planes from pictures and constellations in the sky. Collecting is a way of tokenizing an open, unstructured domain in the form of an evolving vocabulary. It is a process that allows you to structure your understanding while you’re learning.

> Collecting is the _essence_ of autodidact learning, since it requires nothing more than the set of things in a domain already encountered and an improvised scheme for organizing them in memory (and where there are physical things being collected, in reality). Certainly, you can speed up if others have in fact explored the territory, by studying their thoughts, but the method is not limited to mapped territories, and exploration of mapped territories is not limited to paths traced out by others.

> You can collect things that have never been collected before, in which case you’re engaged in discovery and exploratory taxonomy. You can collect things that have already been collected, but organize them differently, in which case you are engaged in refactored perception. You can extract a physics (or _the_ physics in the case of stamps that are relatively straightforward manifestations of physics phenomena, like stars or airplanes), but that’s not the point. Filling out the universe of possibilities as a growing unstructured memory is the point.  If developing a physics becomes the point, and it’s not real physics, you’re either being ironic or you’re constructing a [[cargocult]].