author: [[people/Suspended Reason]]
year: 2021

---

_Part of a series on [[generalized reading]]._

# Turning Away from the Signaling Frame

## I.

Sure, in the beginning was the word—but it wasn’t written, it was read.

Let us suppose that [[meaning]] is [entailment](https://theinexactsciences.github.io/letters/1-1.html), a pragmatic implication. _So what? What’s it to me?_ And for an organism struggling to survive—struggling to parse its environment for resources which it can take within its boundaries to improve its condition, or for dangers which upon penetration (a claw, a chemical) weaken it—salient information abounds.

How do we know that there is reading without writing, reading before writing? Because we read the rocks and stars, the sun and moon, the tides and rivers—forces which, even if they could know our presence, and become bards for us, would be too indifferent to bother. In the beginning, there was [[information theory|information]]: a difference that made a difference, a sign that was salient._ _

A salient sign is a kind of [decision-rule](https://theinexactsciences.github.io/docs/Arguing%20Definitions%20As%20Arguing%20Decisions.pdf): _if this, then that_. [[Behaviorism]] erred primarily because it misunderstood and underestimated the complexities and contextualities of our stimulus-response, mediated as they are by extensive “decoding” schemas which charge the inputs with meaning: _if this, then that_. But its basic instinct—that we observe in order to act, and act on the basis of our observations as they are interpreted by pre-existing beliefs—that was sound. What follows next is that our perception and ontologies are [equally guides](https://metarationality.com/perception) to decisions and actions: a field’s technical vocabulary is precise or ambiguous exactly according to its need for distinction or its leniency to conflate. A difference that makes a difference; American [[pragmatism]] meets semiotic _différence_. We sense signs that point to some taxonomic identity; this identity carries a set of affordances or constraints in relation to our goal.

What happens is an animal learns to eat a leaf, based on its signs, its appearance, and eventually, through evolution, the leaf in turn “learns” to write itself differently, to hide. An insect “learns” through evolution that its predator “reads” by motion detection, and so starts writing out its existence through stillness. Evolution turns one of its great tricks, invents intelligence that is adaptive, dynamic, full-bodied strategic—that can encounter brand-newness and tailor a strategy to its newly learned attributes—_learned_, without scare quotes. We end up, in Spielberg’s _Jurassic Park_, with the paleontologists standing stock-still in front of a T-Rex, breathing down their necks, promising to devour them if they flinch. There is no co-evolution here to teach them;  how could they write this scene for their predator, unless they knew and knew _how_ they were being read, in other words, could read their reading? Theory of mind, the reading of reading, gives way to the ability to dynamically, adaptively write. In lower organisms this stimulus-response pattern—if X, then Y—is “dumb” and automatic; in higher organisms, it is “smart” and adaptive, can pick up on subtle nuances of the stimulus in relation to a context, can enter recursive hypotheticals modeling how they are read, how their reading is read, how their reading is written against.

## II.

And as Sontag has [pointed out](http://www.coldbacon.com/writing/sontag-onstyle.html) (among others), “no style” is a style; there is no such thing as a “neutral” pose because there is no escape from being read. We must make choices in order to live—we must leave the privacy of our bedrooms, and choose clothes to put on, and go out into the world; we must take the metro, or a bus, or a town car, or walk; we can drive ourselves, or be driven; we can purchase coffee (so many options, on the menu board) or we can make it ourselves (drip, machine, K-cup, Chemex; hand-crank or electric grinder; whole-bean or pre-ground; bleached or unbleached filters). When we look across the train car at a young woman in silver moon-boots, when the magician performs a card trick requiring misdirection, our reading is read; this second-order reading, like all reading, serves the purpose of acting. I point at a spot on the map, and make sure your eyes follow, to ensure you understand my reference, to determine whether I need to re-iterate the pointing.

We are not yet even at the workplace and we have produced an enormous informational field to be interpreted, information that, even if at the object-level it is irrelevant to others—bleached or unbleached filters matter little to anyone—reflects deeper attitudes, preferences, personal mythologies (to Barthes)—a comfort with artifice, a preference for the natural. And so long as we may run the possibility of being advantageous or disadvantageous to others—as long as our behaviors and beliefs are salient to the preferences, desires, and goals of others—and that possibility is always latent in social space; [[ecology|ecologically]] co-present organisms’ outcomes are always interdependent; we are always potential threats or allies—then our actions, tailored even as they may be primarily to some pragmatic purpose like staying warm or keeping dry, caffeinating or saving time, beating traffic or saving money, will inevitably be read, are sources of salient information for those around us.

And it is the next step in this social or [[ecology|ecological]] interdependence that, even as we attempt to accomplish asocial ends, we will constrain ourselves, and allow our actions to be influenced, by considerations of how we (believe we) will be read. Pragmatic and interpersonal value combine to form a single payoff function, and others’ actions—which are salient to our own interests—are premised on _their _perceptions and beliefs, which we are partly responsible for, which include as a subset others’ readings of us. And there is no escape from getting read, just as abstaining from a vote is a kind of voting, and nudity in public is either a [[fashion]] scandal or a sign of insanity (a signal to others that we _ought_ to be locked up, _lest_ we cause harm to others). _If this, then that_.

## III.

Let us not speak of signals, then, but of interpretation, and metonyms, [[ecology|ecological]] co-presence; of choices which we predict will convey to either our benefit or our detriment. [[signaling theory|“Signaling”]] implies an out-of-the-way action whose primary or entire purpose is communication of some attribute. We pay exorbitant medical bills for an elderly parent, the argument goes, to signal that we care. But equal in this equation is the corollary: we can choose to forgo paying, _and this too will signal_. The option is always in front of us, and there is a first-order benefit—the asocial, optics-free, intrinsic payoff, which exists irrespective of others’ notice—and a second-order benefit—the social, [[opticratics|opticratic]], extrinsic payoff, which exists irrespective of reality. That is, the fuller picture of human social life, stretching beyond so-called signaling regimes, is one in which all our actions already communicate attributes, and this secondary aspect—atop a more pragmatic aspect, like comfort and mechanical function—is factored into our choosing. Every move we make leaks information; the question becomes which information we wish to reveal (or project, falsely). We watch for, and mitigate, our “cues” as much as we “construct” “signals”—which is why the simplistic signal-cue dichotomy of ethology fails to suffice.

The informational regime that “leaks” from our behaviors is [[anti inductive]]—any newly discovered pattern of _behavior —> information_ becomes “priced in” to individual actions. To illustrate this, we can take an example given by my friend [Crispy](https://crispy.substack.com/): a classroom of young children beginning around ages nine and ten. Inevitably, there is a first crush: one student develops a fascination with another, and begins watching—reading—its object incessantly. (_Fascinare_, for “witchcraft”; the subject is hypnotized, captivated attentionally—in this case by a sudden surge in the salience of an information source.) At first, the object of fascination may not know she is being watched, or if she does realize, she may not know the “meaning” of the watching—what its fact entails for her—and eventually, when this too is learned, she is _still_ unable to write for her fascinated subject until (1) she knows what she herself desires out of him, if only at an unconscious level, and (2) has some sense of what will “steer” him towards this desired outcomes. Over her life she will build this model of male desires, of gestures and actions, signs and signals she can pass along which will either encourage or discourage them—_in order to_ escape harassment or clinch a reciprocated crush or preserve a friendship—as she [["The Tower"|goes from]] a crude model of general human behavior (perhaps premised primarily on her own psychology) to something more specific and fine-grained, and ability to size up “[types of guys](https://www.are.na/inexact-sciences/types-of-guy)” and then interrogate their preferences, desires, properties at an individual level. What she learns from her marks are patterns that are meaningful for the affordances or obstacles they provide in getting what she wants.

As soon as other students learn that fascination—as publicly observable through gaze, or general attention—is a sign of a crush, they will begin to watch others for it, and to hide or flaunt the signs of fascination in public according to whether they wish to conceal or make a point of their interest. They may put on a show of the signs even when they do not feel interest, to accomplish some other strategic end. And individuals will still need to stare _somewhere_, and will sometimes need to stare _at each other_, and (in the case of a crush) will want to watch one another purely to gather information, _separate from the communication of romantic interest_. Ethologists would call this staring a cue—the subject pragmatically wishes to accomplish X (gather information), and in achieving X lets off information Y (gaze as sign of interest)—but this simple classification hides how much leeway of maneuvering is left up to the subject, the way the shape and style of his endeavouring for X changes as he learns the kinds of information (Y<sub>1</sub>, Y<sub>2</sub>…) typically conveyed by the different modes of endeavouring. In other words, externally observable choices (actions, results of actions) develop reputations. _If this, then that_.


## IV.

> Moreover, fashionability, or cool, or style, acts as a passphrase, a shift key, a phase shift, a valuable [[surrogation|proxy]] for speaker identity which then allows the speaker to communicate complexly, reflexively, with reference to self and modified by self. _It is reliable because of the intense difficulty of faking fashion, which requires so much insider knowledge that any successful impostor is arguably no longer a fake_. There’s a reason it’s tough to get into Berghain. Consider, by way of another example, the way true upperclass belonging, or highbrow aesthetic taste, is so impossible to convincingly fake for those outside the caste. So much of fashion is unquantified, subconscious, and ambiently soft that we are not even explicitly aware of the class and taste signals we send, or what alternative signals we might send to signal an alternative identity, and yet we send them constantly, through word choice, attitude, posture, interest, palette, reference, familiarity. (fr. “[Oscillation/Fashion](https://suspendedreason.com/2018/07/19/oscillation-fashion/),” emphasis added)

Why, in ethology, is the dominant frame “signaling,” with its implication of out-of-the-wayness—and why do ethological signals tend to be either costly or indexical—when in human social life, reading and writing—that is, the interpretation and creation of information—form an inseparable part of the fabric of action, and “mere talk” can effectively certify? The answer, I think, lies in the flow of information among human-level intelligences. 

In the same way that the height of a tiger’s scratch marks, on a tree trunk, is indexical to the size of the tiger, the choice of expression in [[anti inductive]] games is indexical to an individual’s cultural exposure and intelligence; moreover, if expression is performed at the right point in the [[anti-inductive|anti inductive]] curve of adoption, the reading subject will not perceive it as conventional, and this lack of conventionality makes it more effective and reliable.

A game is [[anti inductive]] if, once a salient piece of information becomes mutually known (among players in a round, or the larger playing population) it is priced in. That is, no individual player can gain an advantage from leveraging the information. The economy, and the [[fashion]] landscape, are two examples of [[anti-inductive|anti inductive]] games.

In this economy—that is, in the world of [[anti inductive]] games—it is the rolling cycle of [[fashion]] (discovery, adoption, abandonment) which determines the value of “mere talk,” determines whether a writing is read as one wants it to be read. And it is information—where, in the slow processing of pricing in [[foreign and familiar|novelty]]—which allows some to write in a successful manner. 

In [[anti inductive]] games, it is not just that information leaks from our behavior, but that information about which moves are winning leaks—in other words, it is not just that we understood X as a sign of Y—X trait as implying, metonymically, a private quality Y—but that we also have a sense, from watching the resultant payoffs, of whether displaying Y is a winning or losing move, and by extension, whether X is a winning or losing [[metonyms|metonym]]. (Bikhchandani, Hirschleifer, & Welch 1998: “The propensity to imitate is presumably an evolutionary adaptation that has promoted survival over thousands of generations by allowing individuals to take advantage of the hard-won information of others.”) By making a winning move in public, we cannot help but share our winning moves with others, which allows their adoption, which leads to “solution fads.” We are read not just for the purpose of acting (adversarially, against us, or cooperatively, with us) but in order to glean information about winning moves—we watch one anothers’ strategies and their payoffs in order to determine whether we ought to follow in footsteps, or choose a different path. 

Just as inflation—the devaluation of a unit of currency—results from an increase in money supply, many strategic moves are devalued as they popularize. As a given solution—a given tactic of writing—spreads throughout a population of players, and readers are increasingly deceived, readers in turn realize they are being deceived, and update adversarially “against” the solution, developing means of interrogating or discounting the solution. A plane flying over enemy territory might use the metonym of “the shape of tanks from above” as a cue to the presence of enemy tanks proper. So the enemy sets up rubber or wooden tanks which are indistinguishable from the air, causing false beliefs to form. As soon as this practice becomes widespread, air surveillance will develop techniques for distinguishing dummies from the real deal. Such tactics do not work over the long-term of evolution, because as soon as they are found out, they are countered. But they make up the vast majority of moves in human games, _because_ they are short-term. We ride the informational adoption curve until it loses enough value to merit hopping off.