editor: Ahti-Veikko Pietarinen
year: 2007

---
#

> Jiirgen Habermas has also sought to drive a wedge between what is communicative and what is strategic in linguistic action, but with very different music. He considers the two modifiers to be fundamentally different in his own account of communicative practices (Habermas, 1995). His motivation in drawing this division is not to show that the attitudes of the participants may differ in the two settings-the communicative and the strategic—but because he sees some transparent structural differences in them. In communication, the structure of how language is used is "superimposed" on goal-driven action (Habermas, 1998, p. 205). Communication is replete, Habermas holds, with notions such as presuppositions, performatives, and other less objective constraints than strategic action. Its essence lies in the idea of interaction, but in Habermas's view, not in interaction that involves strategic considerations. On the contrary, he maintains, strategic action is parasitic on communicative interaction.
> 
> But is it not misguided to try to draw these distinctions in terms of what is strategic and what is non-strategic? We know that strategic action may be performed cooperatively or noncooperatively. Notwithstanding the performative contradictions that Habermas this ensue from manipulating the listener to give an answer that the speaker desires, communication may well be strategic in the sheer task of understanding and interpreting utterances. We may well play variable-sum games in which the outcomes assigned to total strategies mark varying degrees of understanding. What Habermas seeks to explain is that, if the crux of the [[strategic interaction]] falls within the principle of utility maximisation and hence self-interest, then it is incompatible with reciprocal understanding. However, the principle of utility maximisation, operationalised in game theory by solution concepts, well satisfies Habermas's desiderata of reaching understanding and agreement, having coordination and having cooperation. One just needs to shift the focus to cooperation, negotiation or bargaining, the essence of which is in variable-sum payoffs. This does not diminish the scope of communication; on the contrary, one inherits more precise tools and methods for tackling the structure of communication and discourse.
> 
> ...To put the point in simple terms, what Habermas is after is communicative action that aims at reaching understanding, whereas strategic action exerts influence on others. But the former is not devoid of purpose. In explaining what people do, we need goal-driven action structures for both.

# The Semantics/Pragmatics Distinction from the Game-Theoretic POV
> I take meaning to loom in the relational action structure or the form that is essential in depicting games in their extensive forms. An extensive form of a game is a tree structure that lays bare the individual actions of the players as well as their responses to the actions of their adversaries. These games may be correlated with various things, such as formulas of logic, propositions, declarative and non-declarative assertions in natural language, or even some iconic and visual representations of our cognitive apparatus. One might be well advised to use the term 'signs', though this requires a separate argument which is beyond the scope of this paper. In any event, that the structure is relational means that it is built from recurring interactions between those who utter and those who interpret the assertions. That the structure is extensive means, in the usual game-theoretic nomenclature, that it concerns not only the actual, but also the possible and counterfactual actions—the relational alternatives or referential multiplicities— of any particular or actual play of the game. Nevertheless, it is not the actions as such that correspond to the meaning, but the strategies, the exercise of which gives rise to actions.

> The purpose of games is not to be motivated with experimental findings on how humans actually reason in making their strategic decisions in interactive settings, but with how they would rationally act (linguistically or otherwise), given the background that games are adapted to describe. There is little room for psychological processes in ordinary game theory, just as there is little room for psychological processes of reasoning in ordinary theories of logic.