# [[Jacob Clifton]] reviews

## S1E4: Bad News Blair

> It’s awesome because this is the whole dynamic: Blair instinctively knows, correctly, that she deserves to be loved, which makes it so confusing that Serena’s “it” makes everybody give her stuff instead. We came into this at a weird time, but it’s their whole relationship: trying to hold onto each other in the constant onslaught of this narrative unfairness. A friend emailed me, before this episode, like, “Why do you care about this show? Why do you care if Serena and Blair work it out?” And I was like, “Because Serena will always get the thing, and Blair will always lose the thing, and they will try to love each other anyway, and it’s riveting. Blair is going to want a thing this week, I promise, and whatever it is, she will almost get it, and then Serena will get it instead, and they will both want to die as a result. And if you’ve never been on one side of that relationship at one time, and on the other side of that relationship at another time, what have you been doing instead of having friends, because you always feel one way or the other, and you have to recognize how gross it makes you feel to be on either side of that, because it’s nobody’s fault, it’s just how it happens. There’s a totem pole, and you’re on it, and there’s always somebody above you and somebody underneath you, and you have to be kind to them both or else you’re in an uncomfortable position, and learning this is how we get ourselves under control.”

## S1E16:

> Asher tugs softly on the boy's St. Jude's school tie, in the age-old manner. (We've all done that, every one of us, because it works on everybody: adjust the tie, adjust the collar. It's subservient at the same time it's controlling; it's intimate but out of their line of sight. Their eyes can't see what your hands are doing, which is touching them, and reminding them that you can see them. How many times in a day does somebody touch your throat? If wolves had neckties, they would do that shit to each other constantly.) The boy stands, smaller, on the other side of him, but you can see rigidity in his pose. You can see him not giving in. And when Asher looks around, furtively, afraid, in love, and surveys the street, and kisses him, you can see the boy give in again. Just like he knew he would.

## S2E4: The Ex-Files

> "You know, be honest with where you're both at. Just do that, okay?" I'm not saying it's bad advice, but I think better advice at this point in the game would be to walk before you run, because as any Upper East Sider can tell you, you have to be honest with yourself before you can be honest with anybody else—which hardly anybody on this show has accomplished anyway—or else you're just using them as a sounding board for your own propaganda, which is all Dan and Serena ever do to each other anyway. Mainly about what good people they are.

> [G]rowing up is a process of realizing that you don't ever do anything by accident, and thereby getting yourself under control by figuring out the real reasons that motivate you, and this is the perfect illustration of why: they were both put into positions where their moments of pettiness came at bad times, and now the world is burning.

> Blair's afraid, confused; Serena's eyes track her like a snake. "I wasn't feeling well..." Serena make a barely sympathetic moue and hmms at her for a moment, lovingly, and then takes the scarf from around her head, and ties it around Blair's neck. (How many times in a day does somebody touch your throat?) "You poor thing," she says, musically; Blair starts to panic. She stammers out that she needs to get her missed assignments, and Serena strokes her hair. Just like Georgina did, once upon a time. She promised it would feel so good, to let it burn. She was right. Blair walks away, touching her hair where Serena singed it; the scarf around her neck, like a collar. Chuck appears, grinning. "Well well well. Look who's back on top. I wonder how that happened!?" Serena goes among the people, admiring their necklaces, adjusting their hair, giving her favor and taking it away again. The sun lights her up; she is on fire.