# Legibility and inference

> Consider: “I saw her from across the room, and I immediately fell in love.” Fell in love with what? “She had these big thick-rimmed glasses…and an impish smile…and we’re holding hands, and it’s the fall…” Right, part for the whole. She had big glasses, so you typecast her into the story you’ve run through your head a thousand times, the story repetition has lodged in your unconscious Id. She had big glasses, so she was the type of girl you could love. “No, you don’t get it—she looked like the girl of my dreams.” Exactly. Of course, she knows this, which is why she chose the glasses.

> Since status markers differ across social settings, practice brings skill at playing a given status in a given setting, i.e. a particular character... Which brings us back to the Deschanel Doppelgänger in the coffeeshop: one look at her predicts 25% of her personality. She has a Macbook Air, thick glasses, and a floral dress: for some reason, I doubt she’s voting Cruz 2016. She unconsciously holds her features in line with her default mood: bored, shy, bubbly, bitter. So you walk up to her and say hi and within ten seconds she knows 50% of you, or at least the person you will be around her. First date will put it up to 90%. There are an infinite number of details for the two of you to share, but the name of her childhood stuffed animal has no predictive power, while the way she pauses and inhales before each sentence tells you exactly her insecurities. Put another way: once you have your first fight in a relationship, you know how every other fight will go. With the exception of fixed bias, e.g. racism, first impressions are usually correct. Why? Because we work really hard to make them correct [10]. Consciously or not, we dress a certain way, claim certain beliefs, and enjoy certain things, so that when people look at us, they will instantly know: “She has levels in that shit.”

> Narcissists vacillate, rationalists obsess, but they have the same basic problem: an inability to stick to the script. The solution is to pick a character, write down your values, and commit. Sometimes, you will fail. It will suck. But the doubt will stop. You will have something real that tells you if what you’re doing is right. You will know when you are winning. [cf. [[values clarity]]]

# n+1 theory

> Status is local, not global; convergent evolution just happens when you’re trying to look slightly better than everyone else in the room. n+1 theory of status: you have to be close enough to be recognized as “playing the same game”, and then you have to win. Hipsters look the same from a distance, but any hipster will tell you the ways he’s post-hipster. “I think On Avery Island is the superior album.” Seek professional help. We need the outgroup for our Two Minutes Hate, but most of our day-to-day battles are against the ingroup. 