_Kierkegaard wants us to understand that while we might not have much choice in how we feel at a given time, we have control over and responsibility for the way we relate ourselves to those feelings._ (Gordon Marino)

# Reason 2020: El morada

> X: I get that mediocre metis can beat solid episteme, but the high-level play has always seemed to me in favor of a stable main structure that’s limber and flexible and accommodating enough of transgression within itself, realizes this limberness is in the interests of not just its longterm stability but its longterm growth. If we’re being generous with 70s/80s Paglia this is probably something like her overarching view: Alterity provides not just a shelter for misfits but equally importantly, a means of continuously interrogating and improving the main structure—the main structure providing both the stakes and the premises of interrogation (the premise for response).

> In the language of the West, it is a system with structural allowances for the advantages of the Dionysian, without forgoing the benefits of the Apollonian. Newness reorganizes the existing order around itself, forces a reckoning. There are two ways transgression makes the case for its own integration into the mainstream: it must be either humanized (asking for empathy) or glamorized (asking for admiration at a distance: Bowie, androgynous Messiah; Eno in furs; the luxury Tesla). The first mode is Nelson’s, the second, Nef ’s, a turn away from the human toward the aesthetic, objective, immor(t)al.

> Donatello’s David is “the beautiful boy as destroyer, triumphing over his admirers. He is western ego as sex object, free-standing because separatist... In high classical dignity, [David] does not meet our eyes... He has true Apollonian iconicism.” A object in esteem does not initiate eye contact, which would draw the viewer’s gaze away from its intended focus. Instead, it looks downward or angles its cheekbones as if looking into the distance, reveling in the gaze of admirers.

> The Bacchic is freedom in its most literal sense, which again is just negation, liberty from any rule or any restraint whatsoever—teenage ontology? maybe—including freedom from the (disapproving, social) sober mind, hence, ekstasis. What Euripides’ plays (Bacchae especially) point at, or seem understand, is that edgelord anarchism only exists because society’s there, or school, or parents or whatever, and because these structures are probably underperforming. There’s always been the desire to shed responsibility, but good structure at least minimizes or controls this rebellious urge, and Pentheus’s authoritarianism is definitely not good structure. You need a (The) Man to rail against or you’ll have to actually start thinking about your beliefs positively, instead of as negations of whatever values regime you’re under. Fanatical belief is a social condition. There aren’t any fanatics on a desert island, only pragmatists; the ideology enters when other people do. (Hence, when a local cowherder is unlucky enough to stumble upon the Bakkhai’s camp, the Bakkhai—previously peacefully dormant—rip his herd to pieces with their bare hands, ransack a pair of local villages.) Chaos, the Bacchic, are merely negations— of systems, of order—and without structure to convert to raw fuel, the Bacchic burns out quickly on it own, the way a party dies down when the drugs run out and the high starts wearing off.

> «High classic art is simple, serene, balanced. Late-phase art is accomplished but anxious. Composition is crowded or overwrought; color is lurid. The Hellenistic Laocoön shows the theatrical perversity of late style: heroic male athleticism strained and bursting, strangled by serpents... Dionysus, bound down with Apollo, always escapes and returns with a vengeance...

> A failure of nerve, a wave of self-doubt, a dearth of suspended reason. “Sky cult topples back into earth-cult.”5 The transcendent collapses back into biology, the supernatural into nature. The tragedies are of structure undone by complexity, of a fluid reality which thwarts efforts to control it (High modernism: R. Moses, le Corbusier). Daphne metamorphosizes into tree as she flees the consumption of Apollo.

> “The chthonian triumphs in Medea, as in the later Bacchae. The plays are symmetrical: citizenship is denied to a sexually ambiguous magic-working alien,56 who vengefully debases and liquidates society’s arrogant hierarchs.”57 Through their deviance, the outside world must come to re-reckon with their morality and norms. This re-reckoning re-opens the space of possibility, allows newness and change, keeps the structure limber and flexible. Anohni, like a New Age Paglia, testifies to this same power of transgression, with the surprising twist biological essentialism, a self born in “blood” which society tries and fails to overwrite, such is its power. : «Gay and trans people, in particular, I feel, are the children of nature. We manifest despite the very best efforts of society to crush us. We are the naturally allocated foot soldiers of nature. We have a unique relationship, a non-Christian relationship, to the goddess... We were born as disruptors into this society. We reorganized the conversation. This is in our blood.»

# [[Jane Austen|Austen]]: Sense & Sensibility

Graham Fuller, "Cautionary Tale," _Sight and Sound_ 1996:

> Watching this film [Sense and Sensibily, dir. Ang Lee, 1995], I was forcibly remind of Camille Paglia’s unfashionably neo-conservative thesis that western art is a pagan battleground between the phallocentric Apollonian quest for control and the horrors of Dionysian disorder, the chthonian female swamp.

John Pistelli 2020:

_Sense and Sensibility_ is a conflict of ideologies between Elinor, "the _sense_ (or prudent, rational self-control) of the title. Her younger sister Marianne, by contrast, stands for _sensibility_, a word connoting a range of emotions and values comprising the sentimentality of the 18th-century-novel and the passionate subjectivity and nature-worship of the Romantic movement." [[Jane Austen|Austen]], to Pistelli, identifies with Marianne (they read the same authors) but advocates for Elinor.

# [[Friedrich Nietzsche|Nietzsche]]

Both [[Friedrich Nietzsche|Nietzsche]] and Freud are the culmination of a century of Romantic pushback against Renaissance, Enlightenment, and Classical thought with its rationalizing, systematizing impulses. Rather than being Socratically scrutized, life ought to be lived; too much contemplation gets in the way of life's vitality. 

The only healthy morality is ruled by an observance of these instincts, of the pre-intellectualized stuff of life. Like William Blake, urges are the energy source of life, a view that would later be picked up by Freud and his dynamic unconscious, whose libido is the seat of the unconscious.


## Twilight of Idols

“I mistrust all systematizers and avoid them. The will to a system is a lack of integrity.”

[[Friedrich Nietzsche|Nietzsche]], somewhat like Freud, emphasizes spontaneity; the things that moralists and systematizers try to tame is that which [[Friedrich Nietzsche|Nietzsche]] values most. He sees philosophers as "Egyptianists," turning concepts into conceptual mummies: rather than paying tribute, abstraction and analysis are a form of vivisection. 


## The Intuitive Man

[[Friedrich Nietzsche|Nietzsche]]'s Apollonian/Dionysian framework is preceded, in his thought, by his concept of the intuitive man, discussed in "Truth & Lies in a Nonmoral Sense":

> That immense framework and planking of concepts to which the needy man clings his whole life long in order to preserve himself is nothing but a scaffolding and toy for the most audacious feats of the liberated intellect. And when it smashes this framework to pieces, throws it into confusion, and puts it back together in an ironic fashion, pairing the most alien things and separating the closest, it is demonstrating that it has no need of these makeshifts of indigence and that it will now be guided by intuitions rather than by concepts.

> There are ages in which the rational man and the intuitive man stand side by side, the one in fear of intuition, the other with scorn for abstraction. The latter is just as irrational as the former is inartistic. They both desire to rule over life: the former, by knowing how to meet his principle needs by means of foresight, prudence, and regularity; the latter, by disregarding these needs and, as an "overjoyed hero," counting as real only that life which has been disguised as illusion and beauty. Whenever, as was perhaps the case in ancient Greece, the intuitive man handles his weapons more authoritatively and victoriously than his opponent, then, under favorable circumstances, a culture can take shape and art's mastery over life can be established. All the manifestations of such a life will be accompanied by this dissimulation, this disavowal of indigence, this glitter of metaphorical intuitions, and, in general, this immediacy of deception: neither the house, nor the gait, nor the clothes, nor the clay jugs give evidence of having been invented because of a pressing need. It seems as if they were all intended to express an exalted happiness, an Olympian cloudlessness, and, as it were, a playing with seriousness. The man who is guided by concepts and abstractions only succeeds by such means in warding off misfortune, without ever gaining any happiness for himself from these abstractions. And while he aims for the greatest possible freedom from pain, the intuitive man, standing in the midst of a culture, already reaps from his intuition a harvest of continually inflowing illumination, cheer, and redemption—in addition to obtaining a defense against misfortune. To be sure, he suffers more intensely, when he suffers; he even suffers more frequently, since he does not understand how to learn from experience and keeps falling over and over again into the same ditch. He is then just as irrational in sorrow as he is in happiness: he cries aloud and will not be consoled. How differently the stoical man who learns from experience and governs himself by concepts is affected by the same misfortunes! This man, who at other times seeks nothing but sincerity, truth, freedom from deception, and protection against ensnaring surprise attacks, now executes a masterpiece of deception: he executes his masterpiece of deception in misfortune, as the other type of man executes his in times of happiness. He wears no quivering and changeable human face, but, as it were, a mask with dignified, symmetrical features. He does not cry; he does not even alter his voice. When a real storm cloud thunders above him, he wraps himself in his cloak, and with slow steps he walks from beneath it.

