# Blogs vs. journals

## In favor of journals

Still, there is a general hostility towards blogging from the academy; Ray Brassier famously disavowed the practice in interview with Marcin Rychter: «The "speculative realist movement" exists only in the imaginations of a group of bloggers promoting an agenda for which I have no sympathy whatsoever: actor–network theory spiced with pan-psychist metaphysics and morsels of process philosophy. I don't believe the internet is an appropriate medium for serious philosophical debate; nor do I believe it is acceptable to try to concoct a philosophical movement online by using blogs to exploit the misguided enthusiasm of impressionable graduate students. I agree with Deleuze's remark that ultimately the most basic task of philosophy is to impede stupidity, so I see little philosophical merit in a "movement" whose most signal achievement thus far is to have generated an online orgy of stupidity.»

## In favor of blogging

### Synchronicity & "Take It Or Leave It"

LessWrong user Academian proposes three reasons for blogs to outcompete traditional philosophy texts: idea selection, critical mass, and standards for collaboration & debate. The best of historical thinking, as well as the best of contemporary thought, is all widely accessible. In this model, LessWrong is an "update patch for philosophy to fix compatability issues with science." The Sequences and OvercomingBias were founded, this story goes, with a much higher density of good ideas than are found in most available texts, simply on account of being historically informed, and able to select the best from across disciplines, without emphasis on originality, disciplinary turf wars, or lineage. The "old mistakes" of philosophers, many of which came about due to bad ideas of science and cognition, were not themselves particularly relevant to the contemporary discussion, which exists in a very different discursive landscape, and is not prone to falling into the same problems as ancient philosophy; this lack of historicism, while inevitably leading to some reinventions of the wheel, also allowed time to be allocated toward progressive instead of retrospective learning.

This critical mass attracted others "annoyed at the lower density of good ideas in older literature," who in turn brought many disciplines worth of knowledge into the conversation, dissolving them into the melting pot and changing, for the better, the original knowledge and idea set. In this process, the community existed synchronously in time, despite dispersal across space, so whereas many traditional thinkers spent time squaring away terminology & frames with historical thinkers, operating in very different cultural-linguistic paradigms, the LessWrongers were, at last, in-sync. Moreover, cognitive science and computer science had collaborated toward building stronger, better linguistic models for many philosophical dynamics, which meant more clarity & leverageable language. Peer review was handled informally through upvoting; in other words, it exists, but is just an anonymous quality judgment, which doesn't require extra effort of either the reviewing or reviewed parties, allowing knowledge work to take the front seat. And with members sharing "a context, a language, and a community" in space and time, communication and disagreement were improved.

I think these dynamics are better carved as "synchronicity" and "take it or leave it." 

**Take it or leave it:** Let's start with what is not unique to blogs, but perhaps best exploited by blogs: Today we have greater access to historical texts; better science (cognitive science of concepts, better understanding of language, better understanding of material universe, better understanding of perception & intuition); more secondary sources which aggregate, compare, and summarize primary sources, as well as "score-keeping" or situating within larger narratives. Texts can be strategically selected for use, relevance, and insight. Social graphs of recommendations allow the best of the past to be quickly propagated. Uniquely to blogs: less necessity of paying homage to lineage (e.g. through supervised dissertation, funding, preserving the tradition & language).

**Synchronicity**: A shared language among many thinkers, themselves coming from different traditions and meeting at their intersections, forging a new language to communicate in. The different discourses have an evolutionary arms race, with imported concepts outcompeting old ones that were less descriptive, explanatory, or parsimonious. More rapid publishing; lower word counts and higher information density; the ability to "clear up" or debate or further develop debates in conversation sections; AGILE turnaround.

I'll add another quality: **Lack of mediation**. By mediation I merely mean anything "getting in the middle" of the optimal goal and the incentives for implementation. Academia is highly mediated in that much attention goes to sustaining grants, funding, overseeing classes, playing politics. Rewards and publishing are highly mediated in that there is not a strong correlation between reward and provided value. 

Paul Graham: "I'd noticed startups got way less done when they started raising money, but it was not till we ourselves raised money that I understood why. The problem is not the actual time it takes to meet with investors. The problem is that once you start raising money, raising money becomes the top idea in your mind. That becomes what you think about when you take a shower in the morning. And that means other questions aren't." ("The Top Idea On Your Mind")

[-]**[alfredmacdonald](https://www.lesswrong.com/users/alfredmacdonald)**[7y](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/FwiPfF8Woe5JrzqEu/philosophy-a-diseased-discipline?commentId=xT9AKDa9iPQojyPmq) 4

[YeahOKButStill](http://yeahokbutstill.blogspot.com/2012/11/the-end-of-this-public-blog.html) has an interesting take on the interaction between philosophy done in blogs and philosophy done in journals:

> "... Many older philosophers lament the current lack of creativity and ingenuity in the field (as compared to certain heady, action-packed periods of the 20th century), yet, it is a well-established fact that in order to be published in a major journal or present at a major conference, a young philosopher has to load their paper/presentation with enormous amounts of what is called the "relevant literature". This means that even the most creative people among us (a group I do not count myself as belonging to) must spend huge amounts of time, space and energy trying to demonstrate just how widely they have read and just how many possible objections to their view they can consider, lest some irritable senior philosopher think that their view has not been given a fair shake. Of course, there is no evidence whatsoever that the great philosophers of the 20th century wrote and thought in this manner, as a quick survey of that relevant literature will show.Blogs are a space for young philosophers to explore their ideas without these sorts of constraints, to try ideas on for size and to potentially get feedback from a wide audience. Indeed, the internet has the potential to host forums that could make reading groups at Oxford and Cambridge look positively stultifying. Yet, this is not how things are playing out: most young philosophers I know are afraid to even sign their real names to a comment thread. This, as anyone can see, is an absurd situation. However, since I have no control over it, I must bid this public space adieu."