## Nestorius and Cyril

In the fifth century, the bishops Cyril of Alexandria and Nestorius of Constantinople exchanged a set of letters debating the nature of Christ and the Virgin Mary. Nestorius, arguing against the conventional Greek term _theotokos_ (“mother of God”), defended the reference by an Antiochine priest to Mary as _christotokos_ (“mother of Christ”). Mary, he asserted, was mother to neither man nor God, since Christ’s dual nature was unique, could not be categorically reduced to either. Cyril, potentially driven by political motives, but as far as we know simultaneously sincere in his belief (these are not an either/or), began campaigning against this argument. The correspondence between the two men proving inadequate, it would take an Ecumenical Council at Ephesus to formally resolve the issue in favor of Cyril and theotokos. Nestorius was exiled after bloodshed and power struggles at the highest level. Still today there is a split in orthodoxies; the Church of the East, including Syriac, Iranian, Indian, and Chinese dioceses, actively dissents from the 431 AD ruling.

Yet going into the correspondence between Cyril and and Nestorius, ze realizes that there is a fundamental misunderstanding between them. In hindsight, Nestorius’s claims are seen by some Christian scholars not as heretical but as a product of translative and communicative issues; Nestorius had taken the Greek _prosopon_ to mean “person,” while Cyril has taken it to mean “mask” or “appearance.” _Physis_ too, meaning both “essence” and “body,” comes into play in early Christian debates. There is a different kind of corruption at play here, a corruption of dialogue whose effects ripple onward into modern times and whose presence we can only see with over a millennium of hindsight and scholarship.

## The Holy Ghost

David Stove, "What Is Wrong With Our Thoughts":
> The disagreement about the procession of the Holy Ghost has occupied profound thinkers and scholars on either side for a thousand years; it has had momentous social, political, and military consequences for the same length of time; and it remains a stumbling- block, at the present hour, to all attempts to reunite Western with Eastern Christianity. The philosophy of Plotinus is, by the unanimous voice of the learned, the fine fruit of Platonism, after it had had the benefit of ripening over the longest period of freedom of thought in all human history: seven hundred years