[[Pierre Bourdieu|Bourdieu]], Symbolic Power:

> In the struggly to impose the legitimate vision, in which science itself is inevitably caught up, agents possess power in proportion to their symbolic capital, i.e. in proportion to the recognition they receive from the group. The authority that underlies the performative efficacy of discourse is a _percipi_, a being-known, which allows a _percipere_ to be imposed, or, more precisely, which allows the consensus concerning the meaning of the social world which grounds common sense to be imposed officially, i.e. in front of everyone and in the name of everyone. 

Simler, Ads Don't Work That Way:

> For each of these products, an ad campaign seeds everyone with a basic image or message. Then it simply steps back and waits — not for its emotional message to take root and grow within your brain, but rather for your social instincts to take over, and for you to decide to use the product (or not) based on whether you're comfortable with the kind of cultural signals its brand image allows you to send.
> 
> In this way, cultural imprinting relies on the principle of common knowledge. For a fact to be common knowledge among a group, it's not enough for everyone to know it. Everyone must also know that everyone else knows it — and know that they know that they know it... and so on.
> 
> So for an ad to work by cultural imprinting, it's not enough for it to be seen by a single person, or even by many people individually. It has to be broadcast publicly, in front of a large audience. I have to see the ad, but I also have to know (or suspect) that most of my friends have seen the ad too. Thus we will expect to find imprinting ads on billboards, bus stops, subways, stadiums, and any other public location, and also in popular magazines and TV shows — in other words, in broadcast media. But we would not expect to find cultural-imprinting ads on flyers, door tags, or direct mail. Similarly, internet search ads and banner ads are inimical to cultural imprinting because the internet is so fragmented. Everyone lives in his or her own little online bubble. When I see a Google search ad, I have no idea whether the rest of my peers have seen that ad or not.

quoting Xavier Marquez (2011) "Simple Model of Cults of Personality":

> When everybody lies about how wonderful the dictator is, there is no common knowledge: you do not know how much of this “support” is genuine and how much is not, which makes it hard to organize against the dictator and exposes one to risks, sometimes enormous risks, if one so much as tries to share one’s true views, since others can signal their commitment to the dictator by denouncing you. This is true of all mechanisms that induce [[preference falsification]], however: they prevent coordination.

**Pinker, Nowak, Lee 2007: The logic of indirect speech**

> indirect speech merely provides shared individual knowledge, whereas direct speech provides common knowledge, and relationships are maintained or nullified by common knowledge of the relationship type. Imagine that Harry says, "Would you like to come up and see my etchings?" and Sally demurs. There is little or no uncertainty about Harry’s [[intent]], and none about Sally’s: Sally knows that she has turned down an overture, and Harry knows that she has turned down an overture. However, Sally doesn’t necessarily know that Harry knows; she might think to herself, "Maybe Harry thinks I’m na- ¨ve." In addition, Harry doesn’t necessarily ı know that Sally knows that he knows; he might think to himself, "Maybe Sally thinks I’m obtuse." Although there is individual knowledge, there is no common knowledge, and they can maintain the fiction of friendship. In contrast, if Harry were to have said, "Would you like to come up and have sex?" then Harry knows that Sally knows that Harry knows that Sally knows, and so on. With this common knowledge, they cannot maintain the fiction of a friendship, and they would have the sense that "it’s out there," and that "he can’t take it back."

> The ultimate reason that common knowledge would mandate a relationship change is that the alternative—maintaining the relationship in the presence of common knowledge that contradicts it— would entail the listener relinquishing her claim to rationality, resolve, or honesty. She would be admitting that, despite possessing knowledge that is incompatible with the presumptions of pure friendship, she is willing to pay the costs or exploit the perquisites that go with it (e.g., accepting or offering favors without expectation of reciprocation). Similar tacit confessions would be entailed by other failures to change a relationship following a commonly known direct overture, as in bribes and threats.


**Freitas, Thomas, DeScioli, Pinker 2019: Common knowledge, coordination, and strategic mentalizing in human social life**

> Technically, common knowledge can be captured by a recursive formula, such as “Y: Everyone knows X, and everyone knows Y.” We suggest that people represent common knowledge even more simply: as a distinctive cognitive state corresponding to the sense that something is public, unignorable, or “out there.”

On self-awareness and culpability:

> When people commit transgressions, they feel the self-conscious emotions of embarrassment, guilt, or shame. These emotions are widely understood to repair relationships after a breach of their expected norms. We add a corollary: Since relationships require coordination, the intensity of the emotions should depend on whether the transgression is common knowledge. For example, someone who turns red after audibly flatulating, or mocking a friend without realizing she was within earshot, has honestly signaled that he recognizes that he has violated an expectation, regrets the action, and cares about what others think of him (as opposed to being a social scofflaw or psychopath with no respect for the expectations in the first place). [...] Thomas et al. tested the hypothesis that people feel selfconscious emotions more intensely when their transgressions are common knowledge with observers. Participants rated how embarrassed, guilty, and ashamed they would feel after flatulating during a lecture, mocking a friend behind her back, or falsifying a reimbursement request. The participant had either: 1) private knowledge: only the participant knew the transgression; 2) secondary knowledge: the participant knew that an observer knew; or 3) common knowledge. As predicted, participants reported that they would feel more intense embarrassment, guilt, and shame, and would exhibit more intense physical reactions, such as blushing, hanging their heads, and nervous laughter, when the transgression was common knowledge.