# The scorekeeping analogy from baseball (Noë 2015: Strange Tools)

> ...let’s return, once again, to writing in the case of written language. We can gain insight if we consider what might seem like a fringe and esoteric graphical practice, score keeping in [[sports|baseball]].
>
> A [[sports|baseball]] game lasts about three hours and consists of a messy and complicated stream of activity... Given the fact that there are an open-ended number of ways to individuate events, there is a practical infinity of movements, actions, and events that can occur in a [[sports|baseball]] game. But there is a special activity known as keeping score… Keeping score at the simplest level is keeping track of who’s winning. But at a more sophisticated level it means keeping track of what happens more broadly.

Scorekeeping will often include things like batting order, balls and strikes, foul balls, stolen bases, home runs, and outs. And of course, these individual events add up to points, to victories or losses. Scorekeeping allows you to “replay the game” to some extent, as Noë writes (also in scare quotes), but there will always be losses in fidelity. Some scorekeepers may keep track of smaller details, like the speed and style of a pitch, or else the angle and distance of a batted ball. But they cannot possibly chronicle every detail: the individual ripple of each wave of grass as wind sweeps over the diamond; the headspace of the shortstop after a botched play. Which makes scorekeeping an act of incredibly lossy compression, an attempt to capture something which in its entirety is uncapturable.

This kind of compression, the intentional neglect of details, is an act of extended, (and in the case of scorekeeping, real-time) curation. Like all curation, decisions are made based on the importance or relevance of informational bits. “Important” requires a subject, a priority, or an organizing principle, of course — important to whom? to what end? within what values system or hierarchy? The exact same is true of attributes like “relevance,” or any other curatorial filters.

Lossy compression is not just the essential characteristic of scorekeeping but of all representation, including language. It is curative, it is eliminative, it prioritizes.

## Reagan as announcer
Compressed scorekeeping then needs to be de-compressed. In Neal Stephenson’s _In the Beginning…. Was the Command Line,_ he describes Ronald Reagan’s early career as a radio announcer:

> …[Reagan] used to call [[sports|baseball]] games that he did not physically attend by reading the terse descriptions that trickled in over the telegraph wire and were printed out on a paper tape. He would sit there, all by himself in a padded room with a microphone, and the paper tape would creep out of the machine and crawl over the palm of his hand printed with cryptic abbreviations. If the count went to three and two, Reagan would describe the scene as he saw it in his mind’s eye: “The brawny left-hander steps out of the batter’s box to wipe the sweat from his brow. The umpire steps forward to sweep the dirt from home plate,” and so on. When the cryptogram on the paper tape announced a base hit, he would whack the edge of the table with a pencil, creating a little sound effect, and describe the arc of the ball as if he could actually see it.

Reagan, here, is generating tension, suspense, climax, emotional involvement, all from a stream of sparse details, [[narrative]] constraints. He is telling stories from prompts; in short, he is writing fiction.

And the prompts, printed out and demanding improvisation, originate with a scorekeeper.

# Compression as "abstraction" (James 1890: The Principles of Psychology)

Reasoning operates by abstracting a "whole" (see [[Brute Association]]) and narrowing it instrumentally to a certain property or quality, which is substituted for the whole as the only essential (read: relevant) part. 

> Whereas the merely empirical thinker stares at a fact in its entirety, and remains helpless, or gets 'stuck,' if it suggests no concomitant or similar, the reasoner breaks it up and notices some one of its separate attributes. This attribute he takes to be the essential part of the whole fact before him. This attribute has properties or consequences which the fact until then was not known to have, but which, now that it is noticed to contain the attribute, it must have.

> Now that I am writing, it is essential that I conceive my paper as a surface for inscription. If I failed to do that, I should have to stop my work. But if I wished to light a, fire, and no other materials were by the essential way of conceiving the paper would be as combustible material; and I need then have no thought of any of its other destinations. It is really all that it is: a combustible, a writing surface, a thin thing, a hydrocarbonaceous thing, a thing eight inches one way and ten another, a thing just one furlong east of a certain stone in my neighbor's field, an American thing, etc., etc., _ad infinitum_.

"Every reality," [[William James|James]] writes, "has an infinity of aspects or properties, James writes, and "it is truly said that to know one thing thoroughly would be to know the whole universe." But for the purposes of abstraction it is necessary we "mutilate" this "fullness"; we must conceptualize "vermilion merely as a mercury-compound, for example." The "essential"—and here he really means "relevant"—property is always teleologically derived; it cannot exist without a purpose. In other words, one must be highly context sensitive to be a "good," rather than "bad carver" (see Perry 2017), a rebuttal to Plato's idea that there is an absolute way to carve nature "at its joints"—to James, the "joints" depend on the purpose of the carver:

> [Reasoning] not only breaks up the datum placed before it and conceives it abstractly; it must conceive it rightly too; and conceiving it _rightly_ means conceiving it by that one particular abstract character which leads to the one sort of conclusion which is the reasoner's temporary interest to attain.
 
This is necessary in part because the fulness of reality is overwhelming; the "reality overflows [our] purposes at every pore." 

> Our scope is narrow, and we must attack things piecemeal, ignoring the solid fulness in which the elements of Nature exist, and stringing one after another of them together in a serial way, to suit our little interests as they change from hour to hour.

Abstraction "suggests a certain consequence more obviously than it was suggested by the total datum as it originally came." 

### Sagacity

"Sagacity" is [[William James|James]]'s term for discovering a new, illuminating aspect of a whole to isolate and pay attention to. Abstraction—which is just instrumental compression or context-stripping—is isomorphic with "conceptualizing"; James writes that the rarest ability is that of seizing "fresh aspects in concrete things," i.e. a new "way of conceiving the subject." It is also sagacity which characterizes and drives genius, allowing us to take "novel step[s]" in our thought. (See also Kuhn's _paradigm shift_.)

Darwin's survival of the fittest, or Newton's tile law of squares, are examples of a genius discovering and brining to light the "fitting character" of a document, an appropriate [[framing|conceptualization]] or paradigm via abstraction's extraction of property or part.

# Nguyen 2020: Games & the Art of Agency

> Theodore Porter suggests that, in general, quantification trades informational richness for usability (Porter 1995, 1-72). Quantified measures strip away context. On the one hand, context-stripping reduces the rich informational content at hand. On the other, it makes the information that does remain easily comprehensible and usable across many contexts. it makes the information easy to aggregate.

# Literary Compression
> “And I said to Mabel, I said, ‘computational aesthetics, super-short. Jürgen Schmidhuber’s Theory Jürgen Schmidhuber, an AI theorist and theoretical computer scientist, has proposed a computational account of aesthetic judgments. In his view, a stimulus is judged to be beautiful or attractive by a subject T to the extent that the stimulus is compressible for T. Schmidhuber’s notion of compressibility is taken from algorithmic information theory, but concerns actual rather than ideal compression: it refers to the actual # of bits in T’s mental representation of the stimulus, bounded and fallible as T may be. Beholden to the limitations of T’s computational resources, two kinds of stimuli should be the most compressible: stimuli with evident internal structure (e.g. fractals or a chessboard), and stimuli with noticeable similarities to stimuli already stored in T’s history (e.g. English words or a the sight of a friend’s face). Experimental psychology supports both a preference for stimuli with internal patterns and a preference for stimuli with a similarity to past stimuli.” ([[Peli Grietzer]], Amerikkkka)

Compression in Schmidhuber’s formulation is achieved primarily through pattern matching, identification, and structure, but it can be more generally understood as the practice of “packing in” — of increasing a work’s ratio of information to bit, effect to resource, benefit to cost. 

Though to state it as such borders on tautology, understanding compressive acts as being, therefore, either additive or subtractive is essential. That is to say, compression must involve either an increase in information conveyed (at a proportionally lower cost in bits) or else a decrease in the number of bits (at a proportionally lower cost in information). The specific types of literary compression theorized below fall somewhere along the spectrum of additive and subtractive acts; they are described along with some acknowledgment of what is potentially lost through compression.

1.  **Signification and symbols:** Signifiers and symbols stand-in for complicated systems, ideas, and things; they are a sort of conceptual and mimetic shorthand. This category includes names (concept-handles, [crystallized patterns](http://slatestarcodex.com/2014/03/15/can-it-be-wrong-to-crystallize-patterns/)), visual symbols, and motifs. All language can be understood as compression: 7*1027 atoms — so many elements in flesh and blood and abstract consciousness — become a “human.” When we iterate this compressive process, we increase the informational density of a text beyond the ratios of everyday speech. Of course, for information to be properly conveyed, audience and author must share a vocabulary, must have a general consensus about what any given word means. When this type of literary compression is executed poorly, or else exposed to an inappropriate audience, we call it “jargon.”
2.  **Signal-to-noise**: The elimination of details which contribute minimally either to message (communicative/informational intent) or to effect (emotional/intellectual cognitive stimulation). Mysterious trade-offs inevitably occur: we often prefer buried artistic messages to overt ones, and compositions which are too on-the-nose suffer in quality (in fact, are sometimes decried as not being art at all). This is perhaps because we are hardwired to [appreciate puzzles](http://www.ribbonfarm.com/2015/06/04/puzzle-theory/), and because a general obscurity of message allows a range of conflicting interpretations, stimulating in turn a cultural-philosophical conversation.[1] 
3.  **Double-duty/Multitasking:** Using compositional elements which achieve multiple effects (or else convey many pieces of information) at once.[2] Often, a multitasking, “Jack-of-all-trades” element executes its individual tasks less well than would a devoted, single-purpose element. Nevertheless, its work’s overarching economy is improved.
4.  **Capitalizing on shared knowledge bases**: One step beyond signification and symbols. More than merely sharing the name of a thing, and relying on the audience to understand relationships between referent and reference, this compressive technique eliminates (vs. condensing) information. It operates off the assumption that certain information is implied by a work’s artistic, cultural, or historic context; a remark in a contemporary novel about the “melancholy of September 12, 2001” takes for granted that its reader is familiar with the World Trade Center attacks, and may refrain from mentioning them entirely. In technique #1 (signs and symbols), when an author writes that a character has been diagnosed with cancer, s/he trusts we are familiar with the medical phenomenon which “cancer” refers to. In technique #4, however, the author might describe said character vomiting in the bathroom, and assume we readers have the existing knowledge base necessary to identify chemotherapy as the culprit. All texts also operate off the shared knowledge base that is “information thus far gleaned by the reader from inside the text.”

### See also
- [2016: Ulysses, Wilde, & a Theory of Literary Compression](https://suspendedreason.com/2016/11/21/ulysses-wilde-and-a-theory-of-literary-compression/)
