See also [[conceptual engineering]], [[conceptual analysis]], [[meta-science|philosophy of science]], [[concepts/concepts]], [[linguistic conquests]], [[verbal disputes]].

# Taylor & Vickers 2016: Conceptual fragmentation and the rise of eliminativism

> It is only a slight exaggeration to say that conceptual pluralism is taking over debates in (philosophy of) science. That is to say, important concepts, long thought to have a single underlying meaning, are often now considered to have multiple distinct meanings no one of which is "correct" or "best."

Authors give a couple-dozen examples from various discourses that have undergone "conceptual fragmentation" (CF). The best way to think of CF is a state of discourse after it has undergone certain meta-level procedural steps; more on this later.
1. [[speciation]]. There is no single definition of species in biology. Instead, there are three prominent "kinds" of species: biospecies, ecospecies, phylospecies. Some factorings distinguish between 26 kinds of species. (See Wilkins species table)
2. Acid. Scientists don't have a clear way of determining whether something is an acid. There are in fact many concepts of acids and many chemicals which are or aren't an acid depending on your definition
3. [[Intelligence]]. I think we're all super familiar with this one's fragmentation. I don't think it's crazy to think there is some meaningful high-level G that look like raw learning/information processing algorithms, but it also seems like these algorithms can be biased, depending on the person, to being good at learning/information processing in some domains (e.g. high complexity/chaos, or social cognition) and worse at others
4. Race (cladistic, focusing on ancestry; biological; "purely social"; folk/popular)
5. [[Consciousness]] 
6. Memory

There's some predictable shade thrown at [[against philosophy|philosophers]] and [[conceptual analysis]]:

> For each of the [20] listed [fragmented] concepts, one can form that staple question of philosophy "What is X?" where X stands for memory, intelligence, "a concept," and so on. And in each case the (short) answer—for many people at least—is: "X is many things," whereas at one time there was fierce debate concerning the *one right answer* to the question "What is X?" 

> it is hard to escape the conclusion that a deplorable amount of energy has been spent asking bad questions.

Because, as they point out, it's not just debates over "What is X?" — it's also questions like "Is Y an X?" which is implicitly premised on the "one true definition" mindset. They call this mindset "definitionism," and refer to its passing out of vogue in Phil of Sci as "the death of definitionism," which ushers in almost inevitably conceptual fragmentation. There will never be a satisfactory definition which is (1) robust (i.e. includes all cases of X and excludes all cases of Y) and is (2) concise (i.e., there's a compressive pattern, a short definition rather than a 10,000 word extensive factoring of all existing cases).

Unfortunately, as good as the authors are at laying out the death of definitionism, and the state of conceptual fragmentation across scientific & philosophic discourses, they don't present any solutions that we're not aware of. They advocate context-sensitive pragmatism: that certain definitions work best for certain purposes in certain contexts. They advocate "selective eliminativism," which they present as a big insight/discourse intervention but which is pretty obvious—that is, the paper's frame is that there are two camps in the conceptual fragmentation landscape, eliminativists and pluralists. Pluralists want to provide a lot of qualified sub-definitions pragmatically appropriate to certain discursive contexts and goals. Eliminativists want this too, but they want to get rid of the original term. So, for instance, in material engineering the concept "hardness" means a million things: "scratchability, dentability, breakability, malleability, and machinability." Eliminativists would want to literally taboo the term "hard" from all discourse in material science, and maybe material engineering and even, for radical eliminativists, in colloquial language. "Selective elimination" is just the philosophy that sometimes in certain contexts a concept is too problematic or ambiguous or confusing, and should be tabooed, but not in all cases. See [[verbal disputes|taboo your words]] (TYW).

TYW is aimed at everyday disagreement: "If a tree fell in the forest," "Is chess a sport"—whereas obviously this is a [[meta-science|philosophy of science]] context—but the idea is identical. When words cause confusions, eliminate them and try to factor the concept more precisely and less ambiguously in longform. Not "did the tree make a sound [with no one listening]" but the disambiguations: "did the tree make a sonic vibration" or "did the tree create an auditory experience?" This is good and fine but one thing the authors sorta handwave away is that if all concepts lack an essential natural kind (which they assert) and the goal is replacing one concept with other concepts, then you're sorta stuck in the same position as before. Except—tabooing your words does work. It shouldn't, but it does.

One possibility's that the missing piece of the puzzle here ties in deeply with [[information theory]]. It's about specification, and having multiple pointers that "overlap" and confirm one another and specify from vagueness. I think an information theoretic factoring of this problem/solution would be deeply valuable if it hasn't been done already, and has the nice perk of being super pertinent/of interest to both [[LessWrong]] users ("here's why TYW works") and phil of science folk ("here's why selective eliminativism works").

Examples, to me, while undiscussed by Taylor & Vickers, and [[Eliezer Yudkowsky|Yudkowsky]] himself, are one of the best ways of disambiguating; in combination with eliminativism/tabooing—that is, replacing a short term like "species" with either an understood subconcept, like "biospecies," or a longer factoring like "organisms which can do X and Y but can't do Z"—it does a heckuva lotta work in adding clarity to discourses.

Last takeaway: The authors point out that, when philosophers are confronted with these issues, they usually go, "sure, but we can just be careful about it and it'll be OK." And then the authors provide a buncha examples of authors who are explicitly trying to be careful and yet still cause years- or decades-long discursive confusions. Over and over they reiterate: "being careful" is not enough. We need a solution, or we will continue to have what Chalmers (2011) calls "[[verbal disputes]]"—arguments that are fundamentally definitional, but masquerade as disputes over the referent.