The idea of morality as debt unites Graeber's thinking about morality (as "what is owed") and the evolutionary account of morality as formalization of [[reciprocity|reciprocal altruism]]—the language of cooperation.

# Graeber 2012: Talks at Google

Graeber's theory of debt has a foot in anthropology's history of gift economies (Hyde, Mauss, Levi-Strauss) and mutual indebtedness as community-creating ("community as ongoing collective indebtedness"), which in turn are synergistic with the EvPsych/[[game theory]] discussions of [[reciprocity]] and tit-for-tat.

Debt as morality, Graeber argues, goes way back: in Aramaic, the word for "debt" and "sin" are the same. Much of the moral language of the bible is built off debt/financial language. The Lord's Prayer ("forgive us our trespasses") originally uses the Aramaic for debt (See Etymology). Perhaps the earliest known word for freedom means freedom from debt. 

Debt permeates ancient society and its thought. Plato's Republic opens with Kefalos suggesting morality is paying your debts. The "standard" economic story, originating with Adam Smith, is that barter is inconvenient and replaced by money. This story seems false based on our anthropological study of surviving hunter-and-gatherer societies. Instead, ancestral communities used credit systems of gift-giving, mutual indebtedness, with informal and approximately quantified tallies. 

And always in the history of debt there is a strange tension and complicity between lender and debter. In Buddhism, the Sutras tell that the debter who doesn't pay his debts risks ending up as an ox in his lender's barn—but also that the lender who is too harder on his debters himself risks ending up as an ox in his debter's barn. This association with "sin" somehow seems to go both ways ("complicity").

Debt forgiveness crops up a lot in world history and governance—see the Biblical Jubilee, or Mesopotamian traditions. Too much debt makes society fragile, and this leads the ruling class to forgive.

At the same time, debt creates a basis for interaction—the lender and debter interact around their debt. In an atomized society, this may mean, only when there is some failure by the debter to pay. In a more neighborly, ancestral community, there is a kind of ongoing mutual indebtedness of ongoing favors and repayments that binds the community together while also enabling a better standard of living for all those involved (they can live beyond their strict means; they can insure their standard of living; they can smooth out instability not just financially but e.g. in time obligations, emotional turmoil, etc).

> In many human societies it is the case that if you praise somebody else's possession it's almost impossible not to give it to the person who praises it. This is another one of those things which has a very strange moral power, so much so that you really can't break out of it. There's a great story I always tell from New Zealand, a guy named Te Ringa who was a notorious glutton. He rarely did much fishing himself, everybody else in the neighborhood was a fisherman, and he would walk up and down the beach looking for people coming back from fishing and check out their catch and say, Oh look, squid, that's my favorite, or Wow, that's a beautiful fish. Okay, here's your fish, here's your squid. You just have to give it to him. After about two years people got fed up so they formed a war party and they killed him... Such is the moral power of some customs.

> The vast majority of rebellions, revolutions, insurrections, peasant revolts that you see... they're not about case systems, they're not about serfdom, absolute declared systems of inequality. They're always about debt. Moses Finley, the great classicist, once said there was basically one revolutionary program throughout antiquity: cancel the debts and redistribute the land, in that order. When peasants take over a town, the first thing they do is find the debt recrods and burn them. After that they find the land records and tax documents. [John Adams] says Well, we can't have majority vote, we have two million people with property and nine million without it, what's gonna happen? The moment we allow everybody to vote they'll cancl the debts, after that they'll redistribute the lands. It's just common sense.

Graeber argues that credit is replaced by coinage for primarily military purposes—the government pays soldiers in a currency and then demands it back from the populace in taxes, guaranteeing a market which allows its soldiers to purchase food, drink, board, etc. The birth of these markets, of course, enable a situation that requires markets—namely, contemporary urban, globalized, mobile society, in direct contrast with communities of trust (in which more informal credit systems can suffice). Religion enters as a counterballast to the state-run economic system, but the empire frequently finds a way to strike a deal with its institutions, such as Constantine with Christianity, and the religious institutions take over the centralized financial role. In the Dark Ages, most of the coinage is tied up in the Church, and informal markets return to credit.

But with the discovery of the Americas in 1492, coinage, standing armies, slave industries, and large government colonial operations like the Roman Empire return. This, in Graeber's eyes, defines the period we are currently coming out of, with Nixon in 1971 taking the US off the gold standard. Credit cards become more popular, currency dematerialises, profit is made off financial speculation.

> We're working in 500-year cycles.

> If democracy is to mean anything now it means that everybody gets to weigh in on what kind of promises are made, what kind of promises are kept, and when circumstances change, what sort are renegotiated. I think that's the political moment that we're in right now.

Graeber's issue is that debt between asymetrically powerful parties (e.g. large, wealthy institutions lending to less-wealthy individuals) "structural coercion." He splits up systems of distribution—of the "giving and taking of things"—into communistic ("according to means and need"), exchange (strict, means-agnostic ends-reciprocity), and hierarchy (debt according to social position). See also [[Metritocracy]] entry.