# Ibn Khaldun: Muqaddimah

> We have stated that the duration of the life of a dynasty does not as a rule extend beyond threegenerations. The first generation retains the desert qualities, desert toughness, and desert savagery. (Itsmembers are used to) privation and to sharing their glory (with each other); they are brave and rapacious.Therefore, the strength of group feeling continues to be preserved among them. They are sharp andgreatly feared. People submit to them.

> Under the influence of royal authority and a life of ease, the second generation changes from the desertattitude to sedentary culture, from privation to luxury and plenty, from a state in which everybody sharedin the glory to one in which one man claims all the glory for himself while the others are too lazy to strive for (glory), and from proud superiority to humble subservience. Thus, the vigor of group feeling is broken to some extent. People become used to lowliness and obedience. But many of the old virtues remain in them, because they had had direct personal contact with the first generation and its conditions,and had observed with their own eyes its prowess and striving for glory and its intention to protect anddefend (itself). They cannot give all of it up at once, although a good deal of it may go. They live in hope that the conditions that existed in the first generation may come back, or they live under the illusion that those conditions still exist

> The third generation, then, has (completely) forgotten the period of desert life and toughness, as if it hadnever existed. They have lost (the taste for) the sweetness of fame and (for) group feeling, because they are dominated by force. Luxury reaches its peak among them, because they are so much given to a life of prosperity and ease. They become dependent on the dynasty and are like women and children who needto be defended. Group feeling disappears completely. People forget to protect and defend themselvesand to press their claims. With their emblems, apparel, horseback riding, and (fighting) skill, theydeceive people and give them the wrong impression. For the most part, they are more cowardly thanwomen upon their backs. When someone comes and demands something from them, they cannot repelhim. The ruler, then, has need of other, brave people for his support. He takes many clients and followers. They help the dynasty to some degree, until God permits it to be destroyed, and it goes with everything it stands for.

# Ross Douthat: The Decadent Society

> A small case study: in the original Back to the Future, Marty McFly invaded his father’s sleep dressed as “Darth Vader from the planet Vulcan.” The joke was that the pop culture of the 1960s and 1970s could be passed off as a genuine alien visitation because it would seem so strange to the ears of a 1950s teen. But thirty years after 1985, the year’s biggest blockbuster was a Star Wars movie about Darth Vader’s grandkid… which was directed by a filmmaker, J. J. Abrams, who was coming off rebooting Star Trek… which was part of a wider cinematic landscape dominated by “presold” comic-book properties developed when the baby boomers were young. A Martina McFly visiting the Reagan-era past from the late 2010s wouldn’t have a Vader/ Vulcan prank to play, because her pop culture and her parents’ pop culture are strikingly the same.... 

> Jordan Peterson’s popular tracts against the dangers of postmodernism are fresh and shocking only if you don’t remember the 1980s; if you do, they’re mostly a reminder that it’s been almost forty years since postmodernism was actually radical and new. More generally, the conservative critique of academic liberalism was distilled in the three decades between William F. Buckley’s God and Man at Yale in 1955 and Allan Bloom’s The Closing of the American Mind in 1987, and everything in the three decades since Bloom just recycles or reiterates their points. This is somewhat defensible because the academic politics that conservatives are critiquing keep cycling through the same recurring patterns too, with the campus battles of the 1960s giving way to the PC wars of the 1980s giving way to our own social justice struggle sessions... And, of course, all of these battles are happening on the same elite campuses, the same Very Important Schools as held sway over American higher education and high culture sixty years ago.