# Degenerate play 

A "degenerate strategy," in gaming, is an approach to play which violates the implicit _spirit_ of the game while not technically violating the explicit letter of the rules; for instance, many competitive games rely heavily on concepts of sportsmanship that are never formally codified. The phrase may date back to the 1990s cardgame _Magic: the Gathering_—or even earlier—with "degenerate" alternately refering to either players who employ such tactics, or else the tendency for games themselves to "degenerate" once such tactics are employed.

(In fork parlance, to follow a degenerate strategy in everyday life is to "technically" comply, as in "technically legal," or "technically honest" etc. Degenerate strategies are sometimes called "hacks," and are frequency-dependent insofar as more exploitation attracts attention, leading systems designers to plug the exploitable structure.)

In many [[sports]], degenerate strategies are a source of ongoing debate and controversy. In [[sports|basketball]], a number of "technically" legal maneuvers, or "gray-zone" exploitations of rules, have been debated by analysts and viewers, and led to ongoing rules revisions and ad-hoc officiating. James Harden's "stepback" three-point shot has led to regular complaints from fellow layers in the league, and a number of pointguards more recently have adapted to new shooting foul rules: by feigning the act of shooting upon contact with a defending player from the other team, the fouled guard receives free throws. "[[sports|Flopping]]," a phenomenon across light-contact [[sports]], is a strategy of exaggerating the fallout or physical interference in order to "sell" a foul to referees: players may fall over, whip their heads back, kick their legs in the air, all in an attempt to illicit a sympathetic call. Many leagues now fine players for cases of [[sports|flopping]], but determining and fairly assessing what is acting, and what is legitimate contact, is difficult. Moreover, many players feel that they are unfairly officiated, which leads to a mentality of "evening the playing field" by "alerting" referees to a foul; this framing may, in many cases, be self-deception, but there are also athletes who do receive less sympathy from officiating, in part because they do _not_ "sell" contact. As always, the difficulty lies in the desire to officiate _intent_, which by its very nature is a "hidden" quality which can make itself known only through public signals—many areas of criminal law brush up against similar dilemmas, and no doubt many intentional homicides have been well-argued as "accidents" just as some accidents have been mistakenly determined intentional. 

It's crucial to point out that this "degeneracy" does not, in many cases, degenerate the game, and can in reality lead to an evolution of rules or play, with opponents compensating for degenerate behavior through the discovery of new strategies.

Salen et al., _Rules of Play_:

> Often, whether or not a degenerate strategy is a "proper" way to play depends on how the game experience is framed. When it was discovered that Pac-Man could be played by memorizing patterns of movement instead of through improvisational moment-to-moment tactics, player reaction fell into two camps. Some frowned on using memorized play patterns as a violation of the spirit of the game. Other players, however, capitalized on patterns in order to get higher scores. These pattern players did not consider themselves to be unsportsmanlike at all: they saw themselves as dedicated players who had simply found a better (and more demanding) way to play the game.

Thus, the strategic drift, which begets a behavioral evolution, is a neutral development in many contexts. Rather, problems arise when there is some stable real-world goal or function which we wish to accomplish, and strategic drift guides individuals away from functional efficacy and toward other styles of surrogated play.

Taekwan Kim takes this angle in "What Is 'Degenerate'?" (2014). Degenerate strategies can be "legitimate problem-solving styles," are a kind of "zealous optimization" or an investigation into extremes. "What a degenerate strategy does," Kim writes, "is cut through all the obfuscation to expose the underlying artifice in its starkest form." This stark form allows _efficient_ navigation of the incentive structure (_reward function_), but it "breaks down immersion (and subsequently engagement)"; it leads to disillusionment, disenchanment, the end of illusio.

# David Sirlin

On pragmatism, honor, and cheap moves:

> You will not see a classic scrub throw his opponent five times in a row. But why not? What if doing so is strategically the sequence of moves that optimizes his chances of winning? Here we’ve encountered our first clash: the scrub is only willing to play to win within his own made-up mental set of rules. These rules can be staggeringly arbitrary. If you beat a scrub by throwing projectile attacks at him, keeping your distance and preventing him from getting near you—that’s cheap. If you throw him repeatedly, that’s cheap, too. We’ve covered that one. If you block for fifty seconds doing no moves, that’s cheap. Nearly anything you do that ends up making you win is a prime candidate for being called cheap. Street Fighter was just one example; I could have picked any competitive game at all.

> Doing one move or sequence over and over and over is a tactic close to my heart that often elicits the call of the scrub. This goes right to the heart of the matter: why can the scrub not defeat something so obvious and telegraphed as a single move done over and over? Is he such a poor player that he can’t counter that move? And if the move is, for whatever reason, extremely difficult to counter, then wouldn’t I be a fool for not using that move? The first step in becoming a top player is the realization that playing to win means doing whatever most increases your chances of winning. That is true by definition of playing to win. The game knows no rules of “honor” or of “cheapness.” The game only knows winning and losing.

# Stray thoughts

It is always in the interest of currently dominant players to deride degenerate play, since it threatens their incumbency. Similarly, it is always in the interest of degenerate players to emphasize that their style of play is "legal" and within rules—that if other players had "thought of it" first, their positions of advocacy or opposition would be reversed.

What is or isn't degenerate depends in a large way on what is accepted within a community of players, viewers, and officiators. Insofar as many players see the tactics as dishonorable, they will avoid it, which—while putting them at a competitive disadvantage—does maintain the "degenerate" reputation of the newly innovated tactic. If all players were to accept it, one would imagine the tactic would naturalize; because all players fully expected it to be used, they would optimize and train around it, and it would become "just a facet of the game." It is specifically self-restraint by some players which keeps a play tactic "degenerate."