---
aliases: effect-idea
---

# Maps, Chords, & Effect Ideas

“A dramatic presentation should be an act of initiation during which the spectator will be awed and even terrified… During that experience of terror or frenzy… the spectator will be in a position to understand a new set of truths, superhuman in quality.” (Wallace Fowlie on Artaud’s “Theater of Cruelty”)

Gabe Duquette, writing at Liposuction, divides artistic fit into two categories: chords and maps.

> Chords are elements combined in a way that is appealing, but not because the combination describes reality. Chords exploit the many evolved sweet spots of the senses. They can be comprised of “real” things but prioritize creation of an experience over transmission of knowledge. Chords can be consonant or dissonant — the sum of their parts can elicit pleasure or irritation, or even revulsion. Chocolate and peanut butter fit better than chocolate and ketchup.Maps describe what exists. They exploit the evolved need to understand how reality behaves. They can be aesthetically pleasing but they put the task of abstraction first. Maps “fit” when they achieve compression — when they eliminate redundancies in a pattern of real-world relationships without sacrificing essential features. Poor map fit is usually due to bad compression (irrelevant information that feels like fat on the bone) or outright misrepresentation (features that don’t appear in the abstracted territory). The Wire fits better than unedited surveillance camera footage or CSI: Miami.

There is a third category of fitness, however, which I believe Gabe has potentially overlooked because of his consumption preferences (film and music over visual art and literature). I’m tentatively calling the elements which belong to this category of fitness “Effect ideas,” which is a significantly less catchy reference to the similarly functioning Speech Act.

Where chord elements are in the service of aesthetic interestingness, and map elements are in the service of insight/understanding, effect ideas engage in a bit of both. They are a third category of returns on artistic consumption. Effect ideas are mechanisms of action by a work and onto an audience member, the effect conveying in it valuable information, or posing valuable questions, about the world. Effect ideas are a form of philosophy which exert themselves through the reader watching himself watch the text. Through the self-watching, the reader comes to understand more about art, reality, perception, the world, or the self.

Some examples:

You realize you thought X thing about a novel character based on the character’s gender, race, or other stereotypable feature. You realize you anticipated a different ending based on tropes of the genre. You realize something flawed about your literal perception. You realize you act or feel differently after exposure to specific media products, including behavioral/emotional mimesis of their protagonists.

You notice shifts in interior state when moving between color palettes. You notice you feel disgust at a character’s actions, and that possibly it is the disgust of self-recognition. You notice your judgment or rage towards a fictional character is blown far out of proportion. You notice a work resonates more with you because you share physical characteristics with the represented subject — or that you have difficulty connecting to said subject for the opposite reason.

All these effect ideas, or rather effect ideas period, require some amount of reflection or “noticing” by consumers of the art stimulus. This is why visual arts and literary fiction especially encourage this category of response. Their consumption involves silent pondering, especially viewer self-evaluation when faced with the art object. (Though the effect idea plays an important role in all mediums.) Moreover, literary and gallery audiences are trained to treat these mediums this way, and in response the mediums are created for such a treatment. Often, the effect idea intercepts, and takes advantage of, these mediums’s hermeneutic cycles of prediction, discovery (new information), and prediction evaluation (in light of new info). It is a feedback loop touched on by [[Peli Grietzer]] in _Amerikkkkka_:

> Art is more ‘artsy’ the more [the hermeneutic] process bolsters its intended impact.

Effect idea fitness is a third category of fit, distinct from chord fit or map fit. It is a fitness between artistic or textual elements which cause reflection in the viewer so that a coherent theme emerges, or so that overlapping intellectual stimuli lead to a fruitful crossfertilizing of reflective responses. More over, it is a mobilization of mechanisms with an awareness of how they will be received in the viewer/reader, and of the kinds of reflective responses a viewer/reader will have if he subjects his response to the work to interrogation. Effect idea fitness is the so-called “artsiness” of the work, and a certain prerequisite for successful “high” art.

In 1951, Marshall McLuhan would write to Harold Adam Innis that “The business of art is no longer the communication of thoughts or feelings which are to be conceptually ordered, but a direct participation in an experience. The whole tendency of modern communication… is towards participation in a process, rather than apprehension of concepts.” McLuhan’s error is in thinking the two are mutually exclusive. The kind of conceptual art which emerged in the 20th century capitalizing on the effect-idea used the subjected experience as a way to communicate, a mode both less direct and less railroading than previous models.

# Effect Ideas & Close Encounters of the Third Kind

Gabriel Duquette of Liposuction has raised a number of objections to my insertion of effect-ideas into his maps/chords dualism. Either effect-ideas are not real, he argues, or they are not significant. They are trivial in that they are wildly personal, unpredictable, and unengineerable. Read rather than written into texts, they are the creations of readers and audiences instead of artists and authors. It is akin to ruminating on a rock for hours at end, and then pretending the rock had instigated the conversation.

I want to address these objections here. First though, David Lopez has argued that I am falling prey to a Theory of Mind problem. That is, the category of effects I claim are built into art works and experienced widely by audiences are actually only experienced by myself, a product of either cognitive makeup or too much free time. “Do people actually reflect at length, after an encounter with a work, on the nature of that encounter?” I think he’s right in diagnosing that all too often it is assumed that lengthy analysis, akin to what happens in a university setting, is a central part of most or even many art experiences. It is not. Only a select few particularly moving or provocative works stay with us after we leave a gallery or close a book. Are the rest, the unchosen many, then rendered impotent?

I think the root of misunderstanding here is over the kind of thinking the effect-idea flourishes as, and when effect-ideas usually occurs. Specifically, they happen during, not after, the encounter with a work. They are the result of thoughtful self-watching during an art-viewer interaction. Hermeneutic and predictive self-watching, like “Why did I make this prediction (about the future) or interpretation (of the whole) from what I’ve just been shown?” “How much dissonance is there between predictions and narrative outcomes?” “What assumptions did I bring into the encounter, about both art and the outside world?” Or else it might be affective self-watching — “What about this scene made me feel this way?” And many more.

Others have contested this mechanism’s name. I admit “effect-idea” is clunky. It is not merely an “effect,” as [[John Nerst]] has proposed at Everything Studies (in an otherwise clarifying post). It is a subset of effects, which carry in them ideas, much as speech acts are a subset of speech which carry in them actions. Chords also create effects in the viewer, primarily but not merely emotional and sensory. But they typically do not carry in them ideas.

To respond to Gabriel Duquette’s objections, and clarify what an effect-idea does, I want to look at how a single film employs it:

Near the end of Spielberg's _Close Encounters of the Third Kind_, a group of scientists and military personnel gathers around the mothership as its extraterrestrials slowly disembark. The camera focuses on their faces reacting to the scene (much has been said elsewhere about this technique).

The way the scene has been set up — the military earlier trying to gas Richard Dreyfuss’s Roy Neary and now handling diplomacy, coupled with existing genre tropes and the Cold War/post-Vietnam cultural context of the film — there is an indeterminacy and fragility to what happens next. The E.T.s are enormously vulnerable, walking out of the spaceship naked and unarmed and trusting. Even the way they’re physically molded channels it, their limbs looking eminently snappable. There are films and real-life timelines where assault weapons and tanks would be armed and loaded right about this point. We are at a crossroads for human response, with extreme demonstrated vulnerability on the part of one party. Will we sink to fear or rise into becoming the better angels of our nature?

As a viewer I have been cued into this vulnerability and am looking for signs as to which timeline will play out. Aggressively or amicably? Gracefully or crudely? (_Close Encounters_ is all about human response in the face of the unknown — their fear and wonder and excitement and insanity.) And I am looking for these signs precisely at the moment the camera passes among the faces of the crowd. If there is an answer, it can only be found here.

I find myself least hopeful, and the thought that things might take a turn for the worst — away from diplomacy — first consciously enters my mind, when it sits on a particular model of American man. He is white, he is beginning to gray. He wears aviators. There are echoes in the lines on his face of Eastwood and infantry. Or else he is the boorish, a slightly overweight pencil-pusher, also distinctly American, an unhelpful arm of an uncaring bureaucracy. These are in contrast with the lovable French sociologist and linguist Lacombe. How appropriate that these naked extraterrestrials would be imprisoned, poked and prodded as if hostile forces, in the face of the naïve and trusting Lacombe. We know Lacombe and ourselves trust him, but the rest in the crowd are unknown variables, potential threats which could turn precariousness into unfolding tragedy with a whistled order. (And why is it that the only other known and trustworthy official in the scene, a softspoken mathematician/translator with glasses, also speaks French?)

This tells me quite a bit about myself and the world. I would not have thought the same about an anonymous suited Frenchman, but a cowboy-looking American? In an instant, off a certain expression of cheekbone and brow. I would not have thought the same about an unknown suited black man, primarily because of how certain demographics are often cast (in inoffensive but background roles), and this also tells me something.

Moreover, I have seen in myself a certain cynicism concerning human nature and state bureaucracy alike — how could a government effort not, I reason, mess something so miraculous as this up? And yet there are recent administrations I would have trusted with handling such a task. Is my cynicism a cinematic priming from other films? How well does it map onto reality?

There are shortcomings which Duquette has accused these effects of:

1) Effect ideas do not widely apply, are merely personal in effect. Therefore they cannot be engineered or scaled or evaluated:

I think many people carry the same prejudices I do. I think the vulnerability cuing was strong and intended. Might they feel the effect — the way their reading of a scene and its possibility is distorted by a face — but never reflect on it, never derive an idea? Certainly. But thoughtful audiences self-watch when interacting with art objects. They notice the changes in their inner state and in their interpretations of a [[narrative]] as it progresses. This is a specific mode of reading, which art is often made for and experienced through. (Especially specific traditions like literary fiction; because authors can count on self-watching, it can be reliably written into the text.)

Many might not come away with the same thoughts or realizations from the effect which I’ve described. But I think we can agree that an avenue of inquiry is opened which has a defined distribution of effect.

2) That the effect idea is inefficient from the perspective of material and audience time:

It took seconds for this effect to occur. A half-dozen short cuts. Displaying this same phenomenon through the “map” mechanism — perhaps depicting a character who reads violence into certain categories of face — is certainly possible but ostensibly more efficient. Moreover, such a depiction takes reality as fixed, and shows only one response to the face type, whereas the effect idea allows multiple reactions and ideas (within the aforementioned thematic and conceptual bounds). The artist does not sermonize or lecture or make claims to truth so much as as submit the viewer to an experience which may lead him toward valuable discoveries.

3) That the learning caused by effect ideas isn’t actually learning because it can’t be summed up pithily:

We learn things from undergoing experiences which can’t be neatly summed up. Sometimes it is a matter of calibration and recalibration. Sometimes reminders are learning. Sometimes you “know” something intellectually, so that it appears trite if articulated, but don’t actually know it, need to experience it firsthand, or from the inside. Much of learning is less an accumulation of data points or compressions about how the world works, and more an accumulation of insights into how the self interacts with the world: one learns a craft as much by learning personal tendencies as physical facts.

4) That effect ideas are not intended and happen almost accidentally. They are “read in” to the text by the reader, as opposed to being written in by an author or existing “autonomously”:

It is true effect ideas do not exist independently of their effect on human beings, but neither do chords. (CloseEncounters offers a reminder; the musical sequence used to communicated with the Third Kind would not be beautiful to their ears, since our scales rely on human anatomy.) This makes the effects no less “real” or relevant as artistic mechanisms, art being a human-oriented practice.

I imagine Spielberg did not intend to include certain types of face to show at this moment to convey the above ideas. The vulnerability and at-a-crossroads feeling of the scene, however, is certainly deliberate. And Spielberg may very well have included actors and costumes with profile designed to further this vulnerability or sense of portending danger.

Were accidental or indirect inclusion the nature of all effect ideas it might prove an obstacle to their being engineerable. But it is important to note that in the evolutionary pool and economic market that is culture, successful things surface to the top, author [[intent]] irrelevant. The value of these works is bolstered by the presence of such effects however they originated.

Second, there are countless examples, primarily concentrated in literary and “high” visual arts of artists putting audiences/readers through experiences which yield insight upon reflection. In Iris Murdoch’s The Sea, The Sea, a protagonist-narrator alternates between living alone by the sea and being visited by friends. This narrator is scheming to win back an old love from a purportedly violent husband, and the lengths this narrator is willing to go to seem initially, if drastic, within ethics and reason. The clues which he uses to justify his efforts he interprets to mean that she is bitterly unhappy in her marriage. From inside his subjectivity the is inclined to agree. The given interpretation makes sense.

But when the narrator is joined by friends, with whom he talks events over, the illusion falls apart. Not to him — he remains convinced as ever, essentially up to the end. But to readers, other ways of interpreting her marriage open up, and seem equally plausible. The narrator’s behavior seems mad, erratic and irrational and deeply unethical. But it is only in the presence of others that we see things from outside his view. This argues all sorts of things about interpretation in general, both literary and everyday. It warns against epistemic and inductive [[hubris]], against confidence in one’s interpretation of reality. (Something which we may all already “know,” but still constantly fall prey to.) And it is incredibly effective-affective because we as readers undergo it. We are shown and believe one thing only to watch it evaporate. “Seeing is believing”; no, readers know events are fictional and discount them as such, relying on unproductive resonance as a guide (and resonance will not change our minds). _Experiencing_ is believing, and the effect idea is the only way which this can happen. It is limited in scope as to what it can show us — an insight such as _The Wire_‘s, that all organizations eventually end up prioritizing self-preservation, cannot be shown. But the didactic ground it covers is vitally important, enough on its own to justify art’s existence.

I am confident Murdoch intended this effect. It undergirds the entire book and is one of its most important functions. Many books are like this — they inject the reader into a situation from which one might learn. Effect-ideas include but are not limited to: provocations, trips, twists, mirrors, undergone experiences, complex ethical dilemmas, and deliberate rug-pulling.

Perhaps the best solution is to separate the effect-idea mechanism from maps as chords, and to treat it distinctly instead.

# Predictive hermeneutics

Schematic subversion is an effective way to not just adjust but also bare or expose expectations (e.g. bias, preconception, worldview). Effect ideas are artistic mechanisms of action—by a work, onto an audience member—in which the baring of the assumptive ideology (i.e. schema) conveys with it valuable information, or else poses valuable questions, about the world. A “form of philosophy,” effect ideas exert themselves through the reader watching himself watch the text, predicated on cognitive-predictive self-awareness throughout the art encounter. Through this self-watching, the reader comes to understand more about not just art, reality, and the world but about the schematic self—the set of probabilistic expectations brought to the encounter—through said schema’s enactment on the work (Reason 2017a). Frequently, though not always, the effect idea hinges on a reader’s confused, ambiguated, or otherwise subverted reading of a charged subject.

In this way, the artist catches us in our prejudices and assumptions, and suddenly bares them—which is to say he flashes us with our usually invisible ideologies, suddenly and with recognition. Like Bergson’s “jolt” describing a tripping pedestrian (§3.2), the automaticity of interpretation has been disrupted, forcing an evaluation of what went wrong. The attentive audience member gains an awareness of his own, revealed schema, thus we can creatively classify the effect idea, following Stockwell’s system of naming, as schema-baring.

Though the effect idea plays an important role in all mediums, the visual fine arts and literary fiction especially encourage this category of response. Their consumption involves prolonged pondering and self-evaluation when faced with the art object. Moreover, literary and gallery audiences have been trained to treat these mediums this way (that is, self-reflectively), and in response, the mediums’ works are created with such a treatment in mind. Grietzer 2014: “Art is more ‘artsy’ the more [the hermeneutic] process bolsters its intended impact.” Tellingly, conceptual art hinges on the effect idea, using the subjected experience as a way to communicate—allowing for an observer experience that is less pre-determined or ‘railroaded’ compared to alternative models. 

Still, effect ideas crop up in unusual places, including the oeuvres of artists perceived as “middlebrow” or lacking in cultural [[status|prestige]]. Spielberg employs a predictive lure in the openings of many of his films, in which the audience is cued into misapprehending the opening shot. In _Close Encounters of the Third Kind_, Spielberg leverages the audience’s trailer-cued expectations (that the film’s subject will be extraterrestrials) by showing two bright beam-lights on a dark screen. What appears at first glance to be a spacecraft is revealed seconds later to be a jeep in a sandstorm. In _Jurassic Park_, Spielberg uses audio production, rustling leaves, and ambiguous shot framing in order to convince its audiences that they are looking at a dinosaur—only to reveal that the object in question is a large transport truck. In both cases, what is initially presumed to be a mysterious or monstrous “other” is revealed in fact to be an instrument of man, an effect which carries with it an implicit set of ideas.

# Commonplace

## Simpolism: A Dialogue about Evangelion

> A: What does Evangelion do if not provoke these questions? You were dissatisfied by the form of the show, that it failed to follow your [[narrative]] expectations. What if that was precisely the point, to ask you to look at your own motivations for watching, just as Shinji looks at his own motivations for piloting?