from Claude Lévi-Strauss, *Introduction to Marcel Mauss*

> ...although the human race has always possessed an enormous mass of positive knowledge, and although the different societies have devoted more or less effort to maintaining and developing it, it is nonetheless in very recent times that scientific thinking became established as authority and that forms of societies emerged in which the intellectual and moral ideal, at the same time as the practical ends pursued by the social body, became organised around scientific knowledge, elected as the centre of reference in an official and deliberate way. The difference is one of degree, not of nature, but it does exist. We can therefore expect the relationship between symbolism and knowledge to conserve common features in the non-industrial societies and in our own, although those features would not be equally pronounced in the two types of society. It does not mean that we are creating a gulf between them, if we acknowledge that **the work of equalising of the signifier to fit the signified has been pursued more methodically and rigorously from the time when modern science was born, and within the boundaries of the spread of science**. But everywhere else, and still constantly in our own societies (and no doubt for a long time to come), a fundamental situation perseveres which arises out of the human condition: namely, that **man has from the start had at his disposition a signifier-totality which he is at a loss to know how to allocate to a signified, given as such, but no less unknown for being given. There is always a non-equivalence or "inadequation" between the two, a non-fit and overspill which divine understanding alone can soak up**; this generates a signifier-sufeit relative to the signifieds to which it can be fitted. **So, in man's effort to understand the world, he always disposes of a surplus of signification**...

Jake (@snav) explains:

> Put simply, an "excess of signification" is that we have perceptions (about objects or otherwise) for which we have no word that entirely covers what we mean to refer to. When discussing perceptions of physical objects in the world, science has pretty much all the "properties" of perceptions covered in one way or another. But with phenomenological "objects", feelings, senses, experiences, etc., I at least often find myself at somewhat of a loss, unless I lean on certain technical language of the "[[inexact sciences]]" like psychoanalysis or philosophy. 
> 
> It's plausible that neuroscience will one day reach the level where we can create emergent definitions from purely observed phenomena that explain all of mood, emotion, etc. But you'd have to simulate an entire human brain in gestalt to make that happen. My sense is that [[agency]] or *affordances* are another domain where we might lack words. Fun game i used to play: pick an object, and imagine as many things as possible that you could potentially do with it, regardless of its "intended purpose." Most fun with, like, a stick or a rock. Eventually you reach a point where you can imagine the action but you have no obvious word for what exactly it is you're doing. At least, not one that captures it in its entirety.
> 
> And beyond that, there's "higher order" phenomena, such as interactions between emotions and other emotions, emotions and objects, objects and objects even, that generate even more things which seem difficult to describe purely in language. At some point you need to resort to pure mathematics to describe an interaction in an exact way. In that case, you might be able to summarize inexactly what happened in plain english, but you wouldn't be able to communicate it in its entirety.
> 
> Basically my point is that, unless you're a diehard *Tractatus* fanboy, there is simply an excess of stuff going on such that only some of the stuff can be covered by language, typically whatever's instrumentally useful. Science's universality is also a flaw here, in the sense of many of these "spillovers" are idiosyncratic, personal things. I think that's why astrology etc. are mostly used on an individual level, because systems like astrology (or theology, or certain branches of philosophy) "soak up" these individual weirdnesses that cannot be explained within the universal frame of science.