The scarcity market for distinction and positive association.

# Personal entries

## Reason 2020: The Dark Miracle of Optics

Clothing arises to serve object-level purposes: warmth from cold, shelter from sun. But soon it gives rise in turn to fashion: equally tactical, but suited for the social, rather than literal, landscape. (For a social being, both are essential to survival.) Because the garments, the choices of paint pigment, the geometric patterns and metal hanging from the ears, reflected both the wealth of the individual and his affiliation to group, they became sources of information for recipients, on-lookers: ways of deducing whole from part, of grokking a person. As social reality devours the physical—in Baudrillard’s terms, simulacra—thus fashion devours its mother.

In the Upper-Middle Paleolithic Transition, human societies and economies grow increasingly complex. Trade deals and diplomacy are performed among credible spokesmen, and social hierarchies need preservation across interactions between strangers. Fashion enters as a technology for maintaining and navigating the social graph. “By the production of symbolic artefacts that signified different social groups and kinds of relationships, Aurignacian people were able to maintain wider networks that could exist even between people who had never set eyes on each other,” giving them a competitive advantage. The practice spreads through the law of cultural evolution: “The surface of the body… becomes the symbolic stage upon which the drama of socialisation is enacted, and body adornment… becomes the language through which it was expressed. We have entered the second stage of simulacra. The territory has a map, and there are parties interested in manipulating it.

Once this association between optics and essence, between appearance and reality, between signal and quality (the biological frame) or public and private information (the economic one), is formed, it can be freeridden. It becomes, in most cases, easier to pay “lip service”—to outwardly express the associated public characteristic—than it is to to develop the private characteristic. This is not entirely the fault of the freerider; it is a difficult situation he finds himself in. Imagine he “chooses” (I’m anthropomorphizing evolution) to remain with his blue and yellow colors: even if his “product” is “good” (I’m mixing metaphors, but I mean to say, his advertising is honest), it will take some time for a trusted association between signal and quality, public and private, to form. As consumers, we may initially disbelieve an advertiser’s claims, and for good reason, since there is incentive to deceive. And thus it is with the sun-basking lizard, deciding which butterfly to eat. Far easier for a precarious insect to ride coattails, to imitate and pretend toward what he is not—and so, quite simply, it does.

The connection with fashion should come into view now. The “barberpole” metaphor of fashion, where lower classes continually imitate higher classes, who are themselves engaged in a continual quest for “distinction” from the chasing masses, is a popular one in rationalist circles for good reason. Its cyclical nature is the result of limited options and a continual evasion of freeriders who exploit an associative [[surrogation|proxy]]: clothing for caste.

# Barbershop pole metaphor

From John Barth's _The Sot-weed Factor_:

>  “As for this same raillery and bookish converse your fine folk set such store by,” he went on testily, “any gentleman’s gentleman like myself that hath stood off a space and seen it whole can tell ye plainly the object of’t, which is: to sound out the other fellow’s sentiments on a matter and then declare a cleverer sentiment yourself. The difference here ’twixt simple and witty folk, if the truth be known, is that your plain man cares much for what stand ye take and not a fart for why ye take it, while your smart wight leaves ye whate’er stand ye will, sobeit ye defend it cleverly. Add to which, what any valet can tell ye, most things men speak of have but two sides to their name, and at every rung on the ladder of wit ye hear one held forth as gospel, with the other above and below.”
> 
> “Ladder of wit! What madness is this?” Ebenezer demanded.
> 
> "Take your wig question, now, that’s such a thing in London: whether to wear a bob or a full-bottom peruke. Your simple tradesman hath no love for fashion and wears a bob on’s natural hair the better to labor in; but give him ten pound and a fortnight to idle, he’ll off to the shop for a great French shag and a ha’peck of powder, and think him the devil’s own fellow! Then get ye a dozen such idlers; the sharpest among ’em will buy him a bob wig with lofty preachments on the tyranny of fashion—haven’t I heard ’em!—and think him as far o’er his full-bottomed fellows as they o’er the merchants’ sons and bob-haired ’prentices. Yet only climb a rung the higher, and it’s back to the full-bottom, on a sage that’s seen so many crop-wigs feigning sense, he knows ’tis but a pose of practicality and gets him a name for the cleverest of all by showing their sham to the light of day. But a grade o’er him is the bob again, on the pate of some philosopher, and over that the full-bottom, and so on. Or take your French question: the rustical wight is all for England and thinks each Frenchman the Devil himself, but a year in London and he’ll sneer at the simple way his farm folk reason. Then comes a man who’s traveled that road who says, ‘Plague take this foppish shill-I, shall-I! When all’s said and done ’tis England to the end!’; and after him your man that’s been abroad and vows ’tis not a matter of shill-I, shall-I to one who’s traveled, for no folk are cleverer than the clever French, ’gainst which your English townsman’s but a bumpkin. Next yet’s the man who’s seen not France alone but every blessed province on the globe; he says ’tis the novice traveler sings such praise for Paris—the man who’s seen ’em all comes home to England and carries all’s refinement in his heart. But then comes your grand skeptical philosopher, that will not grant right to either side; and after him a grander, that knows no side is right but takes sides anyway for the clever nonsense of’t; and after him your worldly saint, that says he’s past all talk of wars and kings fore’er, and gets him a great name for virtue. And after him—”
> 
> “Enough, I beg you!” Ebenezer cried, “My head spins! For God’s sake what’s your point?”
> 
> “No more than what I said before, sir: that de’il the bit ye’ve tramped about the world, and bleared your eyes with books, and honed your wits in clever company, whate’er ye yea is nay’d by the man just a wee bit simpler and again by the fellow just a wee bit brighter, so that clever folk care less for what ye think than why ye think it. ’Tis this that saves me.”
> 
> But Ebenezer could not see why. “ ’Tis that shall scotch you, I should fancy! A fool can parrot a wise man’s judgment but never hope to defend it.”
> 
> “And only a fool would try,” said Bertrand, with upraised finger. “Your poet hath no need to.”

# Further thoughts

Fashion in the barberpole sense—the continuous evasion of low-quality imitators by high-quality individuals—may be usefully conceptualized as a discoordination game, in which it is one actor's interest to synchronize with the other actor, and in the other actor's interest to stay de-synchronized ("distinguished" or "distinct").

Trends can also be seen as a result of an inherent dynamic of creative niches—that low-hanging fruit and innovation comes early, the space is explored, and exploitation delivers diminishing returns over time. With saturation, interest wanes, and a desire for novelty rears its head.