_See also [[heterotopia]] and [[liminality]]._

 Liminoid phenomena are those which share many of liminality’s qualities — are liminal-like— but which do not permanently or significantly alter participants’ state/-us. Liminoid phenomena Turner describes as play instead of work, something optional instead of mandatory, and which has post- instead of pre-industrial origins. To van Gennep and Turner both, liminal/liminoid phases involve extended “physical separation” of participants from society at large.

To define, and understand the heterotopic-liminoid in the positive rather than negative, I will be more clear: The interpretation of Berghain which I am advancing is as an “other place.” It is both culturally and physically peripheral to the main urban order (as touched upon in Part I of this piece) — which nonetheless exists in dialectic with “the place” — that larger social structure within which it is situated. This structure includes not just Berlin or Germany but the set of dominant Western contemporary cultural and sociopolitical norms which Berlin embodies. Berghain is in this way _antistructural_ — presenting alternatives to “the” structure — and precipitates a significant portion of liminoid qualities or effects as postulated by Turner, these being optionality, the dissolution of identity, the emergence of communitas, and a state of play (albeit a sacralized sort). Communitas is, in a capitalist and hierarchical society, itself an almost inherent antistructure, but Berghain’s countercultural practices extend much further. Long host to marginalized LGBTQ and fetish communities, it is also the site of widespread illicit drug use and other socially taboo practices.

Berghain, I would argue, is a space best understood as what I will refer to as the _hererotopic-liminoid_. Despite the unwieldiness of this term — and perhaps, someone can and will suggest a better one — it is chosen for its solution to the shortcomings inherent to each descriptor on its own. Heterotopia, in the wake of Foucault’s influential coinage, has been so broadly interpreted, adapted, and reimagined that it lacks much definition today beyond being an “other place” bearing some relationship to both 1) the existing and/or hegemonic order, and 2) said order’s utopic vision. Turner’s “liminoid,” meanwhile, or “liminal-like,” is also somewhat ambiguously defined in its urtext, though a more pressing problem lies in the term’s etymology. While the liminoid is generally like the liminal in its origins, properties, and effects, it lacks liminality’s central tenet — of resembling a threshold. This is unclear in Turner’s texts, and as such its unqualified usage would imply a transformative, passage-like quality to Berghain — that one of the space’s central purposes or social identities was as transition. But paradoxically, clubgoers to Berghain, despite acknowledging the club’s spiritually or psychologically transformative powers, perceive the “liminal” or “liminoid” quality of the space not as a means but as ends in themselves. These ends are the effects of identity dissolution, inverted social structure, and communitas. (Though, as Turner notes, the antistructural qualities of such spaces, Berghain included, act as a catalyst for larger structural reform.)