Synod of Elvira: "Pictures are not to be placed in churches, so that they do not become objects of worship and adoration."

Jan Assmann:
> For Egypt, the greatest horror was the destruction or abduction of the cult images. In the eyes of the Israelites, the erection of images meant the destruction of divine presence; in the eyes of the Egyptians, this same effect was attained by the destruction of images. In Egypt, iconoclasm was the most terrible religious crime; in Israel, the most terrible religious crime was idolatry. In this respect Osarseph alias Akhenaten, the iconoclast, and the Golden Calf, the paragon of idolatry, correspond to each other inversely, and it is strange that Aaron could so easily avoid the role of the religious criminal. It is more than probable that these traditions evolved under mutual influence. In this respect, Moses and Akhenaten became, after all, closely related.

Noë 2015: _Strange Tools_

> A fascinating case is the medieval Christian icon. Byzantine Christians venerated icons but not necessarily because they believed that there was a magical connection between the icon and the saint depicted; nor are they likely to have believed that Jesus and Mary really looked the way they were presented in the icons. For one thing, the icons are not very lifelike. They are cartoonish in a way, for all that they are earnest. For another, different icons present one and the same saint, in certain respects, at least, very differently. A Byzantine icon is not a picture in the sense that it is not a visual model, that is, it is not a construction that is meant to go [[surrogation|proxy]] for something by displaying its visual appearance. An icon is not a likeness in the way that, say, a police artist’s sketch aims at likeness. In another sense, however, we may say, and I gather seventh-century Christians would have said, icons do give a likeness. And we can be precise about what this likeness comes to: it is usually possible to tell, by looking, whom the icon presents. Figures are displayed in icons as conforming to a very precise set of visible criteria. We can use vision to identify them because we know the visual features that belong to their identity as defined in the tradition. In the same way, you can recognize a person as regal, even though there is no one look that all kings have, and in the same way you can tell, by looking, which piece is the knight in [[chess]]. A Byzantine icon is a depiction of a likeness in this sense. It is a picture in this sense. Not a visual model of a person, but rather an exemplification of essential properties of the concept of a person. It is, if you like, the visible articulation of the thought of the person.
