An inexact science is one that is between an art and a science.

Counterinsurgency, as Rand analyst Ben Connable writes, is "both art and science, but mostly art." 

# Manifesto

## Introduction

All knowledge is about the same thing, which is the working of the world. And since the workings of the world are bound up in one another—with kinships in material, property, and dynamic relation, owing to the shared constraints and incentives of physics, the shared ancestry of all things—the knowledge from one one subject can be brought to bear on many others.

Our ongoing conversation about these workings is, simultaneously, held at many levels and registers, not just of systematic abstraction—the level of particle, neuron, mind, society—but also of precision and literalism. Much of discourse is impossibly vague and imprecise in carving their objects of inquiry, or describing their behavior, because there is no other way to discuss or describe such objects, make up the studies of fields like psychology, philosophy, sociology, art criticism—the inexact sciences. Still more “wild” are fields like art and literature themselves, which are working at high levels with the raw, undifferentiated thingness of life, all the way to the social patterns and archetypes of personhood, which is where psychology or sociology pick up again. Art and literary criticism is a gateway realm, discerning demonstrated structures in artistic creations and compressing and analyzing their patterns—Balzac’s opinions on social relations, Dostoevsky’s on the mind, Euripides on the condition of being human, [[Jane Austen|Austen]] on sense and sensibility, Beckett on modern life and language. The use of Shakespeare (Hamlet) or Sophocles (Oedipus) in psychoanalytic theory is one example of this [[rigorizing pipeline|pipeline]], though perhaps not its most outstanding.

But there is another [[rigorizing pipeline|pipeline]], connecting the realms of the inexact science to exactitude, to hypothesis and verificationism. Kevin Scharp describes philosophy’s role in this pipeline for us:

> For the past 400 years, philosophy has been shrinking. That is a sociological fact. Physics, geology, chemistry, economics, biology, anthropology, sociology, meteorology, psychology, linguistics, computer science, cognitive science—these subject matters were all part of philosophy in 1600. As the scientific revolution ground on, more and more sciences were born. This process is essentially philosophy outsourcing its subject matter as something new—sciences. The process is rather complicated, but the most important part of it is getting straight on the right concepts to use so that the subject matter can be brought under scientific methodology. Ultimately, the radical therapeutic program—showing the fly the way out of the fly bottle—is taking an active role in this outsourcing process. Identify conceptual defects (Socratic idea) and craft new concepts that avoid the old defects (Nietzschean idea) with an eye toward preparing that philosophical subject matter for outsourcing as a science. The ultimate goal of this process is the potential end of philosophy–escape for the fly.

This is the idea popular among rationalists that the goal of philosophy should be to kill itself: that philosophy _just is_ the study of the vague and unverifiable, and that its purpose is dealing with this vagueness _in order_ to demystify the subject domain. There are other kinds of philosophy of course—the therapeutic or "cope" sort perhaps best modeled by the Stoics and Epicureans, for instance; the kind of "re-enchantment" philosophies of [[William James|James]]—but these are of a very different goal than naturalistic or metaphysical inquiries into the state of the world. (As opposed to, say, the best way to live...)

There are many obstacles to this process, reasons why the inexact sciences cannot yet be formally studied. One is scale and computation: certain levels of abstraction are more or less tractable. Another is the problem of words, emphasized recently by Sarah Perry in her series of essays for Carcinisation, which has been acknowledged far further back than its most recent prominent advocates, like [[Wittgenstein]], [[Friedrich Nietzsche|Nietzsche]], or [[William James]]. This may be the most important problem to overcome, as institutes like Santa Fe are making headway on attempts to solve the computing-complexity problem. And as Scharp believes, conceptual engineering may end up playing a central role: discovering carvings born of convenience, or helplessly inflated over time by sloppy usage, or anchored wrongly in the first place—say, what ought to be anchored on material reality being anchored on social reality, or vice-versa; the insight of thick concepts is one of recognizing the importance of proper contextualism. The usual dichotomy is between lumpers and splitters, but it is easy to advocate both if you believe that current lumps are sloppily formed, in desperate need of a refactor, a redrawing of borders many-times gerrymandered.

# I

So: you want to make scientific progress. You want to make empirical findings about the nature of reality. Ostensibly there is some “thing” you wish to study. It is vague but not arbitrary: anger, or games, or the annoying things people do in conversations to gain status. “Free speech” maybe, or “gender.” So the thing you are studying is really a folk-linguistic concept: that concept as it stands is part of why the topic is relevant to begin with; that it has a place in our language, and our conceptual schemas, that weaves itself through our understanding of the world indicates there is something “going on” that is “pertinent” to human beings. And to avoid the absolute-zero cold start problem(if such a thing were possible!) you have started with a word.

Who knows what shape this word is in, what kind of terrible distortions to whatever inner kernel of truth have occurred in the decades or centuries since its coinage. And who can trust that it was a coherent concept to begin with? It is just someone’s folk theory, that felt convincing or resonant (had memetic potential) and thus “took off.” Now we are here, where we are.

So there is the problem of a terrible foundation, a concept of investigation that is not necessarily coherent or consistent or non-vague to begin with. Many of the most “relevant” or “pertinent” concepts are the most contested and vague and incoherent: fake news, free speech, liberty, sexuality. We do not have agreed-upon working definitions of these words, and the instrumentalized definitions researchers come up with often have very little to do with real-world uses, or if they do, they only capture a small portion, and are inapplicable to the rest.

But there is a further issue that all around us, constantly, we are being deceived. The deceptions are not huge, but they are constant and permeate our distribution of knowledge, inform and corrode our thinking. The “maps” which we base our thinking around are constantly being “massaged,” not just by partisans and rhetoricians and hacks but by social scientists themselves, by academics and researchers. Citation chains of syllogistic bullshit constantly over-extend findings. Many of the most high-profile findings from psychology are baseless on the premise of their experiment’s design alone, and yet get picked up metonymically as “evidence” of some deep human nature (though advocates may make recourse to its being a product of our “socialization,” the sacred status of the finding as illuminating light remains the same). Psychology was always unready as an inexact science—underformulated, undertheorized, impossible to make tractable, and unable to solve its fundamental problems of language, construct, and inference. As Yarkoni writes in “The Generalizability Crisis,” many of the major psychological advancements have been via what is essentially a form of “rhetorical ruse,” a performance of empiricism that legitimizes the theory—“insightful qualitative analysis dressed up as shoddy quantitative science.” And yet empiricism is the most expensive part of psychological practice, requiring enormous public and academic funding and dominating researchers’ time. Wouldn’t a return to the qualitative give better bang for our buck, at the same time saving us from a false sense of certainty, from overconfident overhauls of our society based on quantitatively baseless claims? That skilled humans working in their local domains consistently outcompete any of our psychological models, in terms of their ability to make behavioral predictions, is some evidence that much can still be learned from such analyses—that a single skilled qualitative researcher, embedded ethnographically within a local domain and engaged in close noticing, can outperform the most expensive and elaborate psychological studies. What we need, as Sarah Perry writes, is “more stamp collecting, less Darwin”—more local, particular, detail accounts and descriptions, theories specific and developed enough to really be stress-tested by prediction.

## II

So how must we deal with words to make progress, or what attitude should we take, and what might that attitude entail? For one, it’s my growing suspicion that a sort of [[generalized compatibilism]] is necessary. Many are familiar with the idea of compatibilism in the free speech vs. determinism debate: philosophers advocating this position claim that the concept of free will refers to a freedom of action, or a lack of external coercion; while acknowledging that in some deterministic way, we “always would have” made a decision the way we end up making it, such philosophers believe this consistent and physically predictable self-stemming response to the environment is meaningfully different from coercion by others; that our will—our desires and values—are equally bound up in the history of causality, exerting a positive force on it even as these values and desires are born, inevitably from that same history. The dichotomy is false, as each side is describing freedom or unfreedom at a different “level,” and thus talking past one another. (See also the subscript gambit for resolving [[verbal disputes]], which was described somewhat earlier than Chalmers _as tabooing your words to get to truth_).

Gluckman’s functionalist theory of gossip holds that gossip is a cultural technology to encourage group unity; Paine disagrees, writing that gossip, rather than protecting the group, is motivated by self-interest on the part of the gossiper. We must ask: why not both? Gluckman describes an emergent effect at the community level which might be selected for in a process of cultural evolution. Paine is operating at the scope of individual motivation, and there is no reason not to reconcile, to say that the individual is, almost always, working from self-interest, and that practices which benefit the community are those which may be selected for in the long-term, either through top-down community design or through sheer survival.

In literary theory, the many battlefronts of the Meaning Wars have provided not a clear victor but a much fuller perspective on the hermeneutic cycle, a contemporary generation of thinkers who are themselves hybrids of previously puritanical positions, or themselves make finer-grained distinctions invisible to philosophers of old. Thus a hermeneutics of suspicion deserves application to any claim that two separate discourses (or even two authors within the same discourse, though this is rarer) are, in actuality, discussing the same target—that it is not a different level of abstraction of a hierarchical phenomenon; that it is not two very different phenomena that have been held under the umbrella of historical usage; that the things being said cannot be reconciled. That both sides have not merely divided and conquered, chosen a specific sense of a polysemous concept and optimized their theory of the whole to it, talking past each other, describing the same elephant from three positions, three aspects. Take a phenomenon such as “anger,” or “status.” When we speak to the “complexity” of phenomena, we perhaps give some token nod to “emergence,” or the relation between parts. But we do not so often discuss the real causes and implications of our operating inside high-entropy systems which refuse simplistic explanation. These systems are multivariate and indeed almost infinitely variate, with a kind of “approaching limit” of null effect from the least influential factors. They are not just situated in a complex world (there is no such thing as “autonomy”); they are also constantly _in flux_ and _ambiguously bounded_. 

This is driven in part by the belief that many views which could be compatible, or reconciled in some framework, are not presented as such not merely by accident but by design—that we must be on the lookout for claims of “distinct” (read: distinguished) irreconcilability since they appear to be structurally incentivized. It seems obviously a mistake then to appeal to reductionism—reductionism not in the naturalist, material sense, but in the causal and dynamic sense of a system in progress. Very few systems we care about can be explained by one to two variables while also providing majority coverage of the phenomena. And yet this reductionism is constantly what we see; class reductionism, signaling reductionism, evolutionary reductionism, technological reductionism; it may not even be explicitly stated, but it is evidenced in the implicit _non-compatibilism_ of the scholarly outlook, an outlook no doubt motivated in large part by the natural incentives of the Bourdieusian field: scarcities of recognition, scarcities of attention, scarcities of funding. Similarly, in the public domain, we see an absolutism which refuses to cede any legitimacy to the positions of the other side: the moral standing of the fetus as human being must be flatly denied rather than simply subordinated to the rights of the bearing woman. Acknowledgment of alternate, vying positions is denied under the “not one inch rule” (a rule of combat, of trench warfare, not collaboration); such acknowledgments would oblige not just integration of the perspective but legitimation of the “other side,” in other words, requiring both bounding (compromise) and a ceding of right-to-speak—neither of which is an acceptable outcome for an interested partisan.

Lest we believe this is the naive or simplistic view of an outsider, we can call upon [[Pierre Bourdieu|Bourdieu]], the great sociologist of academic life, in his 1986 lecture at Princeton:

> The logic of operation of fields tends to make the different possibles that constitute the space of possibles at a given moment in time seem intrinsically, logically incompatible, when they are indeed incompatible, but only from a sociological perspective... The logic of the struggle and the division into opposing camps which differ with respect to the possibles that are objectively offered—to the point where each one sees or wishes to see only a fraction of the space—makes options that are logically compatible seem irreconcilable... Very often... the social antagonisms underlying theoretical oppositions and the interests connected to these antagonisms form the only obstacle to getting beyond and to the synthesis.

But, as [[Pierre Bourdieu|Bourdieu]] well acknowledged,  it is difficult to see outside this space of possibles, and the framings of problems as presented by one's field. Thus [[Pierre Bourdieu|Bourdieu]] unwittingly reproduces the unwitting, ideological, and unnecessary dichotomization of otherwise reconcilable frames: on one hand, the social ("nurture") explanation for disposition, on the other hand, the genetic ("nature") explanation. "[T]he dispositions linked to a certain social origin orient practice towards one or another of the 'possibles' offered as a function of the position which is occupied," he writes, and I am unaware, in his writing, of an acknowledgment that much of one's disposition might be biologically induced (as seems certainly the case). Similarly, in _Sociology is a Martial Art_, we see footage of Pierre confidently asserting that all the personality differences between men and women are of course the result of socialization. “Of course”—as if it were so obvious, as if there were any basis for such reduction other than wishing it to be! (For a world of pure social construction, all nurture, is less problematic to leftist ideology: were there genetic differences, then short of state tampering, many of the inequalities and shortcomings of human beings would be intractable; but were there only social constructions, then the proper state and social structure would cure all evils.) This assumptive, over-speculative, and unsupported reductionist view is a kind of ideology in play, and perpetuates the anti-compatibilism that [[Pierre Bourdieu|Bourdieu]] himself recognizes as styming intellectual progress.

Let us take two very opposed discourses, quickly and coarsely, and show their compatibility. One is poststructuralist thought, with its famous slogan “reality is socially constructed.” The other is the evolutionary, which pushes a view of society as the evolved, ecosystemic, and “fitted” response to nature; in other words, its reflection. But it is obviously the case that culture and nature are in a cybernetic loop, each affecting the other, and examining the contemporary work of cultural evolution theorists such as Joseph Henrich, this chiasmatic intertwining and feedback structure (the “cybernetic” part) is precisely what we see. Similarly, structuralist functionalism traditionally held that man’s behaviors were almost deterministically guided by the institutional structures and rules he was embedded in. [[ethnomethodology]], beginning in the 1960s but picking up from Existentialism, pushed against this worldview, arguing instead that man was an agent whose choices created the structures and [[ritual|rituals]] which enmeshed him. Again, the cybernetic synthesis—that there is a continual top-down, bottom-up loop of feedback and interaction between “levels” of a control structure—is more correct than either stance on its own, and this indeed is to some extent the theory that [[Pierre Bourdieu|Bourdieu]] pioneers in the 1970s and 80s with his theories of habitus and disposition (though, of course, his ideology still prevents him from acknowledging that part of disposition might be genetic in the biological, rather than structuralist sense; in that way, his worldview is still pseudo-incompatible).

“Fit” is thus a key term in the inexact sciences. Though many thinkers before Christopher Alexander have stumbled upon similar ideas, none have taken it to the extent that Alexander took fit. (See also [[Fit]] entry.) In other words, “fit” embodies the role of context and of identity-through-interaction—almost all human cultural inventions are both “objective” and “subjective,” have their power emerge from the interaction _between_ subject and object, as Dewey characterizes the work of art: an emerging encounter; fit. Beauty is fit, as Sarah Perry writes at Carcinisation, echoing this factoring of Dewey’s. But morality, too, is a system of fit between code and culture, and culture is a fit between individuals and between individual and world.

Paglia, in a 2003 appearance on CSPAN, notes a similar patricidal impulse in 60s literary theory, the “baby with the bathwater” approach of any discursive antithesis:

> There was a problem in American literary criticism: the New Criticism had gotten too formalist, too focused on the individual text apart from biography or historical context. It was a reaction against the bibliographic excesses of an earlier generation. What was needed was to supplement New Criticism, by bringing in historical context, history and psychology because New Criticism was also anti-Freud... What poststructuralists did was to abandon the whole thing. 

> The French, it is well known, love revolutions, political, scientific or philosophical. There is nothing they like more than a radical upheaval of the past, an upheaval so complete that a new tabula rasa is levelled, on which a new history can be built. None of our Prime Ministers starts his mandate without promising to write on a new blank page or to furnish a complete change in values and even, for some, in life. Each researcher would think of him or herself as a failure, if he or she did not make such a complete change in the discipline that nothing will hereafter be the same. As to the philosophers they feed, from Descartes up to Foucault’s days, on radical cuts, on '_coupure épistémologique_', on complete subversion of everything which has been thought in the past by everybody. No French thinker, indeed no student of philosophy, would seriously contemplate doing anything short of a complete revolution in theories. To hesitate, to respect the past, would be to compromise, to be a funk, or worse, to be eclectic like a vulgar Anglo-Saxon.

In other words, we not only wish to distinguish ourselves in the sense of achievement; we wish for exclusivity, because exclusivity is distinction. The achievement is merely what sets apart, or excludes. It is the vehicle, not the destination. This position is precisely the opposite of generalized compatibilism. It’s an [[extend-and-retreat]] style of [[torque epistemology|corrections masquerading as new signals]]. You go so fast you skip the synthesis, and proclaim your own innovation from on high. And yet generalized compatibilism appears to be the best way we know to apprehend or process complexity—through recourse to phenomena’s _multidimensionality_. There is a punishing Pareto frontier for any cause taken past moderation, that holds _All is X_, or that _X is only Y_. Even when, in a sense, “neither” position is correct, both positions are informative, as they report and are based off real data, and resonate with the human beings studying them, and therefore are unwise to write off entirely. A kind of “foxy” (in the Tolstoy/Berlin sense) and irreverent approach to frames will beat any single tradition of knowledge. We see some example of this in our contemporary treatment of literary “interpretations.” Each reveals another dimension implicit in the work, and while any one interpretive dimension can be challenged, there is never an expectation of mutual exclusivity. Georgia Warnke, 1999, _Legitimate Differences_:

We assume that these new dimensions of the work can appear because different interpreters approach it with different experiences and concerns, view it from within different contexts, and come at it from the vantage point of different interpretive traditions. We assume that we can learn from these interpretations and, indeed, that we can learn in a distinctive sense: not in the sense that we approach the one true or real meaning of the text or work of art but rather in the sense simply that we come to understand new dimensions of its meaning and thus to understand it in an expanded way.

I emphasize “contemporary treatment” because this attitude toward interpretations is not “natural.” It is the product of a century of [[discursiveGames|discursive warfare]] in literary theory, much of which began with warring over the “correct” interpretation of a text, then moved on to warring over the “proper” interpretive frame/s, and has finally settled on a pluralistic indeterminacy. In other words, it is _anticompatibilism_ and exclusivity of explanation which apparently constitute our natural positions on matters. (And here I wish I could strikethrough the term natural in the way of Derrida, to show the necessity and hopeless misfit of the word). [[John Nerst]]’s _[[erisology]]_ is an ally here, with its frames of [[torque epistemology|signals and correctives]], of partial narratives and partial derivatives, of confusions born from overextended theses (_Reality is socially constructed_, instead of _Much of our sense of reality is social_.)

Each frame opens up vision as much as it closes vision down. Of relevance here is [[Kenneth Liberman|Ken Liberman]]’s observations of coffee-tasting, which builds off the work of Merleau-Ponty on “chiasmic intertwining”:

> When you drink the coffee, descriptors give you access to dimensions of the flavor and you can communicate those dimensions to other tasters... [you can] direct someone to find what can possibly be located with the use of that descriptor… [it] is opening up the taste of the coffee _but at the same time it’s closing it down_, because once you categorize this basket of fruit… then how do you taste, you know, vanilla that’s going on at the same time... Nobody’s even attuning to it. You might not even sense it.

Our descriptions both unveil and veil simultaneously. In obscuring, we illuminate. To Merleau-Ponty, Heidegger, and many others, this is a central paradox of phenomenology.

Generalized compatibilism is a view of verbal, moral, and theoretical disputes alike. (See “Linguistic Conquests” for an explanation as to the reductionism of narrow-and-conquer methods in philosophy, which is mirrored in literary theory’s disputes over proper factoring of the handle “meaning.”) Many of the characteristics of the philosophical debate over free will and determinism are shared by ongoing debates across the humanities and inexact sciences: an appearance of irreconcilable difference which, when reconciled, present us with greater clarity than either position on its own. While there are deep motivations to refusing to acknowledge an oppositional interpretation, the most incisive thinkers historically—if not necessarily those recognized in their own times—are those who manage to integrate their opposition into their own frame, who “yes and” or qualify, who can to “maintain coverage” or “preserve ground” rather than reduce multidimensional reality into one-dimensional explanations. We can take it from John Shook, relaying John Dewey’s fin-de-siècle philosophical practice:

> There were Hegelian rationalisms flourishing, other kinds of idealisms, various kinds of radical naive empiricisms, all kinds of anti-Darwinian alternatives. And Dewey […] incorporated what they were trying to say into a naturalistic framework so thoroughly that nowadays the field looks very cleaned up from our perspective.

## III

This approach should take both sides of the [[rigorizing pipeline|knowledge pipeline]] seriously: not just “pre-packaging” knowledge “out of” philosophy and “into” the sciences (knowledge’s “promotion” through legibility), but in taking advantage of the rich artistic and literary resources, which have fastidiously mapped observations about human psychosocial life for centuries (obscured, noisily, by tradition, prestige-seeking, and flourish). 

But what does it mean, to be "wild," and how do we navigate a wilderness? Through resonance, I think, resonance to test the untested propositions. But first the wilderness.

Theory theory, echoed in computational neuroscience’s free energy principle, and cognitive science’s [[predictive processing]] (as well as anticipated by Kant, Piaget, James, [[Friedrich Nietzsche|Nietzsche]], Bergson, Hegel…) holds that individuals build “folk” theories of themselves, of others, and of the world which unites them. [[Theory of mind]]—it is in the name—that we are constantly modeling, anticipating. At its crudest we call these theories “[[stereotype]]”; in intimate relationships, however, they become well-calibrated over time, precise senses of a person. And, what’s more, there is a class of folk who write these theories down (or capture them in image, in sound…). It is no coincidence that Bergson (along with so many historic others) have seen fiction as offering a kind of insight untouchable by the standard sciences. Nor that computer nerds—a Bayesian bunch if there ever was one—have a saying “absolute proof in the form of comics.” The comic artists represent capturing resonant encounters; the resonance is a distributed system of verification and self-testimony.

Theory is not the only thing fiction writers fill their books with. They seek to entertain, to perform, to make homage to the past. But their theories of the world fill even areas not explicitly marked as such: to write “realistic” dialogue is to represent one’s model of real-world interaction; to write “realistic” characters, novels, interactions, desires, psychologies, is to do similarly. And even the so-called “unrealistic” texts, such as fantasy or magical realism, are simply working at a different “level” than literalism—to say it rained for one hundred years is to capture a metaphorical truth; the Impressionists eschewed realism for capturing perception i.e. impression; in the surrealism of [[David Lynch]], the demon is the metaphorical psychopath (and he even gets the population distribution right).

Compare the usual dynamic in psychology, where findings which violate folk wisdom are rewarded over those which align with it. Work like Muzafer Sherif’s Robbers Cave Experiment, the Stanford Prison Experiment, and David Rosenhan’s famous mental hospital infiltration—these studies are among the most discussed and influential of the field precisely because they shock us with a view which overturns our intuitions or assumptions. And yet each of these historic findings has, in recent decades, been discovered to have been taken out of context—to take just one, the Stanford Prison Experiment, it now appears that students guards were pressured by the supervising researcher to act aggressively toward inmates, that the behavior was not spontaneous but instructed. Whenever the proper context is put back in these experiments, they are suddenly rendered comprehensible; the reactions of individuals in the study (e.g., behaving a certain way out of a desire to please a researcher making explicit appeals to enacting that behavior), and thus the studies’ power is defanged. (Metrics : holism :: psych studies : folk wisdom. Formal vs. informal, with “advantages to both.” Enter them into dialectic; don’t substitute one for the other.) What we must realize is that psychology is as close, in its current form, to art as it is science—its competitors are as much film and fiction and philosophy as neuroscience. What is the expression from folk wisdom? Premature systematization—the root of all evil.

Resonance is our guide in navigating this forest, a kinship of represented experience with our own schematic, “folk theorized” understandings (or perhaps the more “formal,” if not necessarily more precise, theories of the inexact sciences). The n = of personal experience can be large indeed, and even if it is not precisely rigorous, there is reason to think it is Bayesian approximate, at least as teleologically motivated. (“Skin in the game” is crucial to the formation of strong folk theories; a salesperson or trader has a set of understandings which ought to be taken more seriously than they presently are. [See Brundo de Finetti, Probabilism: A Critical Essay on the Theory of Probability and on the Value of Science]) Resonance is not a perfect heuristic: it is clouded (even as it is enlightened) by the credibility of the speaker; it is the meaning of behavioral economics’ so-called confirmation bias; it is prone to what Carhart-Harris and Friston call “pathological” or maladaptive priors. But the sympathetic oscillation between two models of the world, each formed over many years and experiences, is “not nothing.”

We can take seriously projects such as “slippages”—[[Sigmund Freud|Freud]]’s, Hofstadter’s, those of amateur stoner theorists—as casting light on inner workings. Perhaps we cannot test them rigorously yet, but as anyone who watches crime shows is well aware, plenty of evidence which helps solve cases is inadmissible in court—a start rather than an end, a pointer to where to start gathering. We can engage in close, bottom-up noticing of the kind which [[ethnomethodology]] has been so successful at—EM’s attempt to mitigate “ideology” can be construed as an avoidance of pre-committing to a reductive theory, first explaining things in their full sense of life (much like fiction, one notices) before attempting to analyze, and keeping that full sense always at the forefront, protecting its substitution by the reduction. And we can reconcile such observations with high-level theories, grounding and testing schematic models such as psychoanalysis or [[predictive processing]] against close noticing in order to find new directions, add nuances, or challenge orthodoxies.

## IV

_'TIS_ then: both radically compatibilist and radically skeptical—by necessity, in face of what we know about the warping effects of both institutions and language. When Da Col and David Graeber founded HUA, almost a decade ago, they gave it the mascot of the ouroboros—the spirit animal being a nice gesture, even if the specific choice is predictable, one of the oldest symbols in the book. And in the inaugural issue of HUA, the founders quoted Eduardo Viveiros de Castro's 2003 _And_, advocating for a similar multi-frame approach to the one we endorse.

> We might say that the Melanesian concept of the person as a ‘dividual’ (M. Strathern) is just as imaginative as the possessive individualism of Locke; that understanding the ‘philosophy of the Indian chieftainship’ (P. Clastres) is just as important as commenting on the Hegelian doctrine of the State; that Maori cosmogony is on an equal par with Eleatic paradoxes or Kantian antinomies (G. Schrempp); that Amazonian perspectivism is just as interesting a philosophical challenge as comprehending the system of Leibniz... Indeed, if it is a question of knowing what matters in evaluating a philosophy—its capacity to create new concepts—, then anthropology, without looking to substitute for philosophy, remains a powerful philosophical tool, capable of airing the stuffy ethnocentric corridors of our philosophy, while freeing us in passing from so-called ‘philosophical anthropology’.

If you would like to call this stance postmodern, "postcolonial," or "decentering" you may, but we haven't taken it up on ethical pretenses. We've adopted it as stance because it is an informationally objective superior approach to knowledge.

We've also chosen for our mascot the pfeilstorch. Back in the Enlightenment era, no one really knew where birds went in winter. Some thinkers speculated they flew to the moon, or hid underwater, or morphed into other organisms completely. Then some storks came down  Europe, with long African arrows through their necks, having made their many-thousand-mile migrations with the injury. The inexact sciences are defined by intractability, mystery, the impossibility of measurement. Perhaps some of them merely await the technological advances to crack them open. Others will take a bit more ingenuity.

# Unintegrated parts

## Bourdieu 1991: Language & Symbolic Power

> Sociology can free itself from all the forms of domination which linguistics and its concepts still exercise today over the social sciences only by bringing to light the operations of object construction through which this science was established, and the social conditions of the production and circulation of its fundamental concepts.

## Chapman: Going down on the phenomenon

> Francis Bacon, the ideological founder of modern science, constructed an extensive and explicit analogy between science and rape. Nature is a woman whom the boldly masculine scientist forces to yield her secrets by sexual domination.

> Feminist philosophers of science, such as Evelyn Fox Keller, have suggested that many scientists still see their work this way. They argue that, besides being icky, this approach is unlikely to lead to good science, for the same reason it is unlikely to lead to good sex. One may achieve domination over nature (as indeed we partly have) but one is unlikely to achieve understanding, respect, or (most importantly) delight.

> Keller suggests that alternative sexual metaphors are possible. We can not only deconstruct but supplant the Baconian system. Her contribution is the notion of “wet data.” She suggests that the term “hard data” has an obvious underlying sexual sense. Hard data are worshiped by many scientists. As hard as possible: you want to force out of the instrument every decimal place you can get. More interesting, she thinks, are wet data: ones that may be preliminary but lead in intriguing, if perhaps still ambiguous, directions.

> One must be willing to approach the phenomenon it on its own terms, and one must also honor one’s personal and quirky way of working. Neither of these is encouraged by contemporary scientific ideology. To give good head you must not lean too heavily on what you already know. Every woman is different, and different each time. An attitude of “I’m going to make you come because I have great technique” is very similar to “I’m going to make this experiment work because I am so brilliant,” and neither works well.]

## Chapman on Reasonableness

_Chapman: In the cells of the eggplant_:

In everyday usage, “rational” has an informal meaning of “thinking and acting in ways that make sense and are likely to work.” In this sense, “rational” is synonymous with “sensible.” It means “not stupid, crazy, or meaningless.” I will call this reasonableness, reserving “rationality” for systematic methods.6

Much of The Eggplant is about the relationship between these two. Understanding that relationship is a prerequisite for meta-rationality. Rationalism misunderstands reasonableness as a primitive approximation to rationality. In fact, it has somewhat different—though overlapping—functions. “Mere” reasonableness addresses the nebulosity of the everyday world effectively, which formal rationality can’t. Meta-rationality combines resources from reasonableness and rationality, plus ones of its own, to understand and act effectively in circumstances the others cannot manage.

## Chapman (forthcoming): In the cells of the eggplant

> As always when something is a prerequisite for itself, you have to proceed in a spiral. An approximate understanding of a small part of the subject makes it possible to grasp more of it, and thereby to revise your understanding of the initial beachhead. You need repeated passes over the topic, in increasing breadth and depth, to master it.

## Austin 1962: How to do things with words

> What I shall have to say here is neither difficult nor contentious; the only merit I should like to claim for it is that of being true, at least in parts. The phenomenon to be discussed is very widespread and obvious, and it cannot fail to have been already noticed, at least here and there, by others. Yet I have not found attention paid to it specifically.

## Alan Kay

Kay argues you can't just have a single "team" of startup-like driven folk—you need a full league to compete against, the Lakers can't become a great [[sports|basketball]] team alone.

## Rozin, Scott et al 2014: Asymmetrical Social Mach Bands

> For almost 100 years, psychology as a discipline has been jockeying to be classified as a natural science. The natural sciences are often viewed as more prestigious and more advanced than the social sciences, and psychologists have strived to be viewed as “baby” natural scientists rather than the most “scientific” social scientists. In recent decades, psychology has appended the word science to itself (psychological science) and to former subareas that have now become departments (e.g., cognitive science, neuroscience). This trend in nomenclature is also illustrated in the names of several relatively new journals in psychology: Social Psychological and Personality Science, Perspectives on Psychological Science, Current Directions in Psychological Science, and Clinical Psychological Science. And unlike textbooks in more secure natural sciences, introductory psychology textbooks usually include a section on what science is and what the scientific method is, implicitly or explicitly claiming that psychology is a (natural) science.1 We think psychologists are defending their belief that psychology is properly categorized as a natural science; in contrast, physicists, biologists, and chemists, who are more firmly placed in the natural sciences, rarely feel compelled to defend their disciplines as natural sciences. This phenomenon is an instance of a general social phenomenon: the tendency for border or marginal members of positively valenced groups to emphasize their membership in those groups.

## Luigi Perissinotto 2003: Wittgenstein and Plato

Quoting [[Wittgenstein]] in _Blue Book_:

> Philosophers constantly see the method of science before their eyes, and are irresistibly tempted to ask and answer questions in the way science does. This tendency is the real source of metaphysics, and leads the philosopher into complete darkness.

Perissinotto reflects:

> From this perspective metaphysics is philosophy that models itself on science and that shares with science what [[Wittgenstein]] calls "the craving for generality" (or "I could also have said, _the contemptuous attitude towards the particular case_"). In any event, we cannot but note that, for Wittgenstein, the roots of this "craving for generality" are to be found, long before the method of modern science, in Plato, who constantly, in his dialogues, and in _Theaetetus_ in particular, "dismisses as irrelevant the concrete cases": "When [[Socrates]] asks the question 'What is knowledge?' he does not even regard it as a _preliminary_ answer to enumerate cases of knowledge." [_See also [[Indexicality]] entry._]

# Rigorizing pipeline

_See [[rigorizing pipeline]] entry._

# Engineering and applied sciences

@the_aiju, Twitter Jan 4 2021: "engineering is actually prior to science, not the other way around! — forcing the world to a lower complexity using engineering is the first step to scientific discovery"

Daniel Kahneman: Introduction to Gary Klein:

> In the US, the word "applied" tends to diminish anything academic it touches. Add the word to the name of any academic discipline, from mathematics and statistics to psychology, and you find lowered status.  The attitude changed briefly during World War II, when the best academic psychologists rolled up their sleeves to contribute to the war effort. I believe it was not an accident that the 15 years following the war were among the most productive in the history of the discipline.  Old methods were discarded, old methodological taboos were dropped, and common sense prevailed over stale theoretical disputes.

# Methodologies of the Inexact Sciences

"The problems, being existential, are universal; their solutions, being human, are diverse ... The road to the grand abstractions of science winds through a thicket of singular facts." (Geertz, _The Interpretation of Cultures_)

## 210626 TIS Transcript

[2:25 PM] suspended reason: Undervalued Methodologies in the Inexact Sciences:
1. Stamp collection
2. Defamiliarization
3. Comedy
4. Cultural criticism ("artifact processing")
[2:26 PM] suspended reason: Stamp collection is just an attempt to gather a large database of examples in order to understand the breadth of possibility, which dynamics meaningfully vary, etc. You need to do a lot of stamp collecting in biology to get to a theory of evolution
[2:27 PM] suspended reason: Defamiliarization is in the name—making the familiar foreign. "Ready to hand" --> "present at hand," to Heidegger, or recognition --> perception for the Russian formalists
[2:31 PM] suspended reason: There are a few kinds of defamiliarization I've seen... don't have a good taxonomy yet, and some of these might be compressed or carved up better, but—
1. anthropologizing, e.g. that essay on the "Nacirema" ("American" spelled backwards)
2. historicizing, which is to say, writing about the present as if it were the past
3. subjectivizing, where you present the thing through the eyes of someone who processes it very differently than yourself
4. surrealism/magical realism, where dynamics are distorted or exaggerated in symbolically truthful ways
5. closely related to surrealism, allegorization, where everyday life gets figuratively translated into a fantasy or sci-fi world
6. re-framing—any reconceptualization of a domain typically presented in a familiar frame
[2:32 PM] suspended reason: An additional approach I haven't seen yet, but wanna try my hand at, is writing about the present as if it were the science fiction of the past
[2:33 PM] suspended reason: Cultural criticism, aka "artifact processing"—similar in some respects to stamp collecting, except it's the decomposition and analysis of some dense set of examples to understand how their dynamics interweave. Some people have called literature "applied philosophy"; here, you're basically trying to reverse-engineer the theory from its application, or at least, understood how the theory is contextualized.
[2:34 PM] suspended reason: Comedy, parody, etc—I probably have the least to say about this, but often comedy defamiliarizes. It's also good at pointing out flaws in people's models pretty efficiently

## [[931774D]] on [[David Reisman]]'s sociological work: 

> In contrast to European intellectuals tendency to make messianic broadsides and blanket declarations, Riesman is ever attentive to detail and nuance.

> He drew on his observations of a wide range of material-children's books, movies, novels, interviews, and social science data.

> Another concern is that many scholars spend their time redescribing social phenomena through one or other theoretical lens with no clear reason for selection and no attempt at an overarching synthesis. As Duncan Watts (2017) notes, **contradictory findings can thus coexist for decades in the scholarship without anyone noticing or trying to resolve the contradictions, what he calls the “incoherency problem.”** Rationalist sociologists find ever more colorful metaphors for this state of affairs, from Besbris and Khan’s (2017) “wheel of fire” to Gerald Davis’s (2015) mystery house with “a number of architectural details that serve no purpose: doorways that open onto walls, labyrinthine hallways that lead nowhere, and stairways that rise only to a ceiling”.