# Writing

The writer has a *schema*, a cognitive model of the world, which has its own unique structure including sense of proportion and underlying values, as well as the probabilistic models built up from the unique "anecdotal" experiences of the writer, and the information-bearing materials they've come across in their lifetimes. The author attempts to capture and communicate saliences from their schema (which is to say, indirectly from the world) and unite them in some sort of aestheticized mode which informationally and formally constitutes a "[[vibe]]." The text is written with some conception of both the author's tradition ([[genre]]) and readers (audience) "in mind" (see Rochat, *Others In Mind*): These entities are actively modeled during the composition process, and to some extent, the modeling of these entities (audience and genre) are linked; the history of the form will have a tremendous effect on the way readers will understand the author's production from it, as we will soon see.

Just as in daily conversations and communications, the author produces language with the schema of their speech's audience in mind, which is, in lesser writers merely—and in even the great writers, largely—proxied by the speaker's own schema, his own understanding of the meaning of words and the implications of grammars. Mostly this process is unconscious; sometimes, a phrase will jump out to the author as especially indeterminate, or ambiguous; he "knows" what it "means," but understands the reader will not interpret it in the vein he intends, or wishes, them to. The author will read through, edit, try to "see the text through another's eyes," will even send it to other sets of eyes and schemas for such feedback, attempting to close the gap between what he wishes & believes his text conveys & what it does in fact convey. 

# Reading

The reader comes to the text with a schema of his own, an associative model in which connotation—evoked associations—runs rampant. As he reads, he continually makes predictions and fills in "gaps" (ambiguities, indeterminacies) as part of the  active process we call interpretation. Like the author, the reader has some sense of conventional, shared meaning, and though it too largely overlaps with his own sense of the meaning of words, he can sometimes defer to what is "usually" meant, or what is "culturally associated" with an utterance, in a way divergent from his own schema's automatic understanding or evoked associations. Any background knowledge about the author will likely further inform the probabilistic modeling of sense-meaning, the reverse-engineering of [[intentionality]]. 

The sense-making process is linear but able to retroactively update previous understandings. Part informs whole informs part. Predictions are unconsciously made, updated, checked against, which informs mood as well as the valence of passing events (surprisal, development, growing dread, etc); at this point the process of literary anticipation mirrors the process of daily hermeneutics—our understandings of the narratives that are our lives, or the progression of our relationships, careers, communities, cultures.