From [[Super Smash Bros]] Wiki: 
> In competitive _Smash_, "the metagame" usually refers to the trends in strategy that appear in high-level play under tournament conditions, and these tactics are often the most influential. The metagame is not static; it evolves over time as players adapt to counter frequently used strategies, and new strategies are discovered or become popular.
> suppose Tactic A is effective and popular within a gaming community, and Tactic B offers advantages over Tactic A, but is considered a poor choice in most other circumstances. Some players may employ Tactic B in response to Tactic A, creating a shift in strategy. Tactic C, while usually effective, may be avoided because of its vulnerabilities to Tactic A. Eventually, Tactic A may become less common, as more players begin to use Tactic B to counter it. As a result, Tactic C may then return as a common strategy, or an entirely new effective tactic may be discovered, creating another shift in strategy. These shifts are examples of the way in which the metagame progresses and develops over time

# The Mindgame

The mindgame is part of the metagame. From the Smash wiki:
> One of the most basic forms of mindgames, revolves around the idea of studying the opponent, learning his/her behavior and any traits of their playstyle, such as patterns, and proceed to punish them whenever they use these. In addition, the individual traits of the character used are also taken in consideration. Because of this, predicting is mostly effective when the player knows how the opponent's character functions (amount of lag after attacks, range, weight, etc.).

An example of playing in donkeyspace with exploitable (high risk) but high reward moves; cf [[anti-inductive]]:
> sometimes the best way to perform a mindgame is by trying to attack from a new perspective, do something that generally isn't done, run away from the player habits. Since players tend to stick to their habits, even if unconsciously, countering this by doing something different is a good way to escape a situation. Unpredictable players are the ones that can read a situation fast enough to do something the opponent isn't expecting and throw him off balance. A good example is using a move that is generally seen as dangerous due a specific drawback (range, lag, knockback, etc.) or because it was used "randomly" without a proper setup, but succeed into landing it because the opponent wasn't expecting it. It is a high risk, high reward strategy, but can sometime works when least expected.