The "n+1" theory of games—play within local rules, conventions, genre, but extend it one logical step forward. 

From Hotel Concierge's "How to be Attractive":

> Status is local, not global; convergent evolution just happens when you’re trying to look slightly better than everyone else in the room. n+1 theory of status: you have to be close enough to be recognized as “playing the same game”, and then you have to win. Hipsters look the same from a distance, but any hipster will tell you the ways he’s post-hipster. “I think On Avery Island is the superior album.” Seek professional help. We need the outgroup for our Two Minutes Hate, but most of our day-to-day battles are against the ingroup. 

From [[Sam Fussell]]'s _Muscle_:

> My [competition] routine was dramatic, all right, but not too dramatic. The goal is to play by the audience's accepted rules, and then to shock them within the form, not venturing outside it. Michelangelo's _David_ and the Farnese _Hercules_ are one thing, but, as professional body-builder Bob Paris learned, _The Dying Gaul_ is quite another.

From "Discursive Games, Discursive Warfare":

> A player can challenge one sacred pillar of the game (or “field”), perhaps, but only one at a time, and typically only if one has already been recognized as a formidable player of the game (e.g. via previous, more paradigm-affirming work, or via strong interpersonal/institutional affiliation.) We can call this the “one pillar at a time principle,” and note a similar “n+1” principle: success within [[discursive games]] is perhaps most reliably accomplished by first, strongly affiliating with the premises of single stable, established game, and then updating or extending it in a novel way (perhaps by importing ideas from a second discourse). We see this frequently in artistic genres: one must adhere closely enough to convention to be recognized as an AbEx painter, or a metal band, while providing enough novelty to be interesting instead of redundant. (See also Murray Davis’s concept of “the [[interestingness|interesting]]": the balance of [[foreignAndFamiliar|familiar and foreign]], of the affirmative and subversive, is key to our assessments of discursive moves.)