# Reason 2020: Economics Thinking

> This theme of self-assertion, in _House of Games_, is interesting. It’s a common one in contemporary discourse, particularly for its gendered contours. Where it is perhaps man’s common pathology to take more than he gives, it is woman’s to give more than she takes. At the same time, we hear often that women have papered over their desires, lost touch with their sense of I want. Tentatively, I am reminded of one of Schelling’s arguments—that ignorance is a great strength in negotiation. The realities of social obligation are strong, but felt; the social ledger exists inside heads; and while the realities of real debt and deep imbalances between people can and do strain social relationships in consequential ways, the fear and feeling of obligation and indebtedness—at least among the conscientious—long precede such consequences. And I have observed with my own eyes the psychic toll of feeling over-indebted, of losing sight of contractual realities and the objective history of the social ledger, in favor of quieting the ever-present “should.” This clash is the definition of neuroticism. To instrumentalize the paying of debts—to contextualize the “should” as instrumental to continued amicable relations, which is to say as part of an ultimate I want—is to grant [[agency]]. Where does a feeling of control originate? From a confidence in one’s ability to manipulate one’s environment. And where does an ability to manipulate one’s environment stem from? From one’s modeling of the environment. (See the Good Regulator Theorem.)

