Here’s the thing: My recent batch of content has been Twin Peaks, Gettysburg, The Wire, and the pattern across all of them is a 5-90-5 rule. It isn’t blanket misanthropy—Franzen, maybe, has this, or Kubrick. In these works, the portrayal’s more nuanced.

Earlier this year on a walk with Nico I said something about the demographics of a [[David Lynch|Lynch]] production: a few psychopaths, a few heroes, a lot of ordinary folk—Milgram types, not bad eggs, just timid types whose values are housed in the social realm, rather than internal conviction; those who can’t be relied upon to hatch when needed. Types who float on the current rather than fight it. And hey, that’s fine and good, no hard feeling; there are good studies indicating that a majority of conformists is important in a large population for [[game theory|game-theoretic]] coordination; it creates a buffer between passions, it makes converging on equilibria possible.

But you get it in Gettysburg too. The demography’s more or less agnostic to what level of power structure you’re on; bottom or top, there are a small number of people paying attention, with a strong set of values and a pragmatic eye to optimizing for them: Chamberlain, Buford, Longstreet. The ones realizing half a century before World War I that Napoleonic tactics no longer worked; that the accurate bores of rifles meant trenches and breastworks, defense-based guerilla warfare, not frontal assaults in formation. Longstreet spends the movie (and the war, in actuality) trying to persuade Lee that his strategy is doomed and counter-productive; its climax comes 52,000 casualties later—the high water mark of the Confederacy. Much of Lee’s aversion to defensive war, to digging in, is that he began the war digging breastworks around Richmond, the Confederate capital, and being daily humiliated by Richmond papers—the king of spades, they called him, before he became a national hero.

(Chamberlain is recognized; it’s one of our more optimistic historical parables; he ends up achieving the rank of brigadier general, then goes on to be president of Bowdoin and governor of Maine. The guy spoke ten languages; he taught rhetoric what do you expect.)

In The Wire, it all depends on the administration, the competence and capacity of the selective force. The media, administrations, and the public comprise the selective force on advancement in both the Civil War and Baltimore municipal—the Union wins because, after 2.5 years of shuffling through generals, Lincoln finally picks a winner in Grant, who drags along Sherman with him. The selective force is what elevates Chamberlain to governor or ostracizes him into the edgelands. In The Wire, the very best are shit-canned to the basement to work paperwork or guard the lost and found, they’re put out of the way because their competence exceeds that of their superiors and they know it; because of their inability to bend to bureaucratic policy; because their insistence on good policework (like Grant and Longstreet’s stubborn “good soldiering”) makes them an obstacle for pencil-pushing and image-sharpening, for surrogated targets and the bullshit work that comes with it. Lee, to his credit, had an eye for pragmatic, bullshit-free officers—if a weakness for the aristocrats. Jackson and Longstreet at the very top, his righthand men. Perhaps Lee’s main problem is he couldn’t keep his generals alive, they kept racing into battle for glory at their own hazard; and he was forced to cycle out his commanders regularly.

In Twin Peaks you have what, Hank? Cooper? And Sheriff Truman. They’re matched in power by Leo, the Renaults, Benjamin Horne. Maybe this is just the way it has to be in narrative: if the forces of good & evil aren’t matched, the conflict isn’t juicy. But maybe there’s a sociology to [[David Lynch|Lynch]]’s characters, a way that power congregates among the two groups of 5s, the heroes and villains. 

So the conflict becomes over who sets the institutional culture, the town culture—whose influence creates the incentive structure, the current of flow and desire and social acceptability that underlies the behavior of the other 90%.