# Phillips as Poplit

It was spring, around 11am and cold; we had teas with condensed milk in a small Malaysian place in the Lower East Side and I held up an AbEx painter book that was on sale and you made a joke about the page layout.

For about a week the prior May I’d wondered whether or why there hadn't been a poptimist moment in literature, whether that was even a coherent concept. I’d been convinced by a friend the main reason was popular literature was missing the impassioned obsession with craft and technical production, the “Futurist (as in Italian) machine-worship thing.”

But now I was wondering, somewhere between Ludlow and Allen Street, whether this might be an entirely separate question from whether there was admirable or highbrow pop literature. George Melly who raises the topic of pop literature in the 1970 _Revolt Into Style_ thinks the answer to this second question is also no: 

> The written word, at any rate ‘between hard covers,’ represents a permanence of a sort. Thought is trapped there... There is a further objection: to write and to read are solitary activities. Pop is communal, tribal, a shared experience.

None of these convinced you when I read them out loud, which made me finally sure they didn’t convince me either. Records are as physical as books, you said; the digital has untethered writing from any distinctive permanence or aura thereof; pop experiences can clearly be solo and yet also somehow communal (think the opening scenes of _Almost Famous_, the discovery of his older sister’s record collection, its portal into another world). 

With the _Sticky Fingers_ cover in my eyes I told you “I have this weird suspicion that writers like Kaitlin Phillips might be innovators of pop literature. All the traits are there (for a masculinized version, think rock’n’roll). An emphasis on style over content, the _way _and electricity with which you deliver a line, the cult of personality and aspirational quality of fandom, the quasi-total package of high-status youth, the conversion of private life into public life, image and glamour. This seems like one of the most exciting developments in recent writing; we probably _needed_ a pop literature, or at least it was inevitable.” But I told you I also thought we needed to be clear about what pop literature was. Reading Maggie in contrast, what strikes me always is her honesty, her willingness to bear the grotesque or deeply shameful without immediately redeeming her image, without the savvy branding or the sleight of hand that turns flaw into costly signal, or weakness into an display of competitive femininity. 

By the time you checked email over kabocha squash &amp; sake I was mostly talking to myself: “The vision’s always felt to me like, ‘let's replace a history of brutal economic hierarchies with a future of brutal social hierarchies,’ which, middle school sucked for a lot of people and might be worse than capitalism but, your mileage may vary.” Maybe I don’t see a serious problem in reveling in bad ideology, maybe the style makes up for it. Maybe it’s the sometimes [Janus face](https://twitter.com/peligrietzer/status/1175893123236597766) of some of these scenes which grates, one face making, with moral indignity, a claim towards the radically anti-hierarchical, while the other indulges gleefully the pleasures of life at the top.

## ii.

Of pop music Alva Noë writes, “the artist is not a vehicle for music; instead music is a vehicle for the artist.” Pop music is the “art of pure personal style,” a manipulation of cultural codes to enthrall and to convert. What propaganda is to art, advertisement is to pop, a hypnosis, an attempt at psychic implantation.

The music, or here, the writing, is a conjuring act of personality, an apparition summoned by the right triangulation of tone, the attitude, and taste (these all being orientations towards, the _how_ instead of _what—_ in a word, style). The material world is transformed into iconography: o_bjects _are used by _people, _therefore status is transferred through association. “We can all agree that bath salts are passé,” Phillips opens a college essay of hers, “Eastern Promises,” written for the _Spectator_. Five years later, her _Bookforum _review of a Rhonda Lieberman tribute begins in explosive baroque prose: 
> Not just because I—Barnard _shiksa_ from the boonies—was conditioned to envy my more socially savvy Jewish American counterparts for their sunglasses (from Selima), their scarves (not Hermès, actually) knotted the way their mothers taught them, and other birthright privileges awarded young ladies of a certain socioeconomic-religious-cultural demographic, who I imagine learned about [[Sigmund Freud|Freud]] from their fathers (this is just a fantasy!), am I fascinated by Rhonda Lieberman.

These links between people and objects, and their history, constitute a cultural graph on which the pop work has been positioned. The objects gets separated out like God on the first day, splitting darkness from light: in or out, low or high, melted into sacred vs profane. In a poptimist or “post-critical” era, this is one of the few discourses which revels Roxy-like in aristocratic sentiment. Often, relatedly, there is in pop a a deep interest in fame and inner circles, celebrity and its half-sibling fashion— see Warhol, Bowie, Gaga. 

From early in Phillips’s writing career, agile code-switching is a cornerstone of the performance. “You might shvitz—uh, sweat—with Dad at a Mikvah” she writes aside references to W.H. Auden, Mick Jagger, and Benjamin Britten in “Eastern Promises.” The article, which sells the virtues of bathhouses to her college classmates, includes as primary selling points the potential for brush-ups with celebrity, the history of Someones who have been sighted through the steam. (Another article from that time is a sprawling amateur-journo investigation of St. A’s, the hyper-elite Columbia fraternity which sports a private chef.) Like a young Joan Didion, there's a self-deprecation in her writing that can only be read as [[knowingness|irony]] in-context: “I came up from [the pool] shrieking... I report only that I made no friends.”

Another piece from 2013, a longform on Tao Lin, was linked to by the LARB, Ron Silliman's blog, and some alt literature sites. She wrote about Lin’s demonstrated savvy at building an online following, speculated on the mechanics at play: “Many critics, and fellow bloggers, ask ‘why?,’ but perhaps the more pertinent line of inquiry is ‘how?’” She had started a Twitter account at n+1, @nplusoneinterns, that took as its shtick the pretense of being a group account. Tao Lin himself ended up asking her to make a similar account for him; she gave out the password to classmates to post whatever they wanted. She wasn’t alone in fielding this kind of request; there was a small army of Lin fans that he led and encouraged in growing his reputation through stickering public spaces and making fan blogs.^[Is it only fair I trace her provenance this way? From her essay on Lin, “His decision to be a writer seems to have cemented during his senior year, in 2004, when Lin went into self-imposed isolation. He left the dorms and moved to New Jersey.” Later: “His first three years out of college are marked by their tenacious, discursive productivity. In fact, from his output during this period, it is hard to tell he lost hope at all.”]

Phillips’s iconographic matriarch is always Rhonda Lieberman. “She embodies the particular kind of East Coast sophistication I ideated and craved, a wry dinner-party companion known for asides about her complicated relationships with intellectuals.” In Lieberman's writing, the academic-intellectual is turned into a life texture: “1) daily horoscopes and tarot readings; 2) [[Friedrich Nietzsche]]; 3) listening to [others on] Prozac.” Like Lieberman, Phillips smashes the high and the low side-by-side (more code-switching, the cultural-linguistic equivalent of _turning on a dime_): “Derrida is the Madonna of thought. He’s antiphallogocentric and a total diva.” Or, “Thorstein Veblen’s pecuniary emulation, i.e., the Jewish American Princess who buys a Coach purse at twelve only to learn about Prada a year later.” Abstract --&gt; concrete via the i.e.. Lieberman herself is proto-pop, a total mother. “Reviewing a book by Lieberman weirdly feels like reviewing _her_,_” _Phillips confesses.

## iii.

The flags are at half mast in Union Square: I’m watching you watch a squirrel, seriously fat, scaling Lincoln’s brass left leg. The trees are black-denuded still, it’s too early in the year. Post-structuralism, psychoanalysis, and Derrida: the dollar used bookstands are stacked with them, some kind of sign. The end of an era or an era’s perpetuation? The last clearings or signs of health? Internal readings (formalist, structuralist, New Critical) vs. external readings (Marxist, biographical, sociological, Bourdieuian). The visiting European intellectuals who come lecture, give panel talks, do their continent disservice so routinely out of touch, or banal, or sentimental in that way middle-aged liberals get.

You had recently started switching from _kairos_, event-time, to _chronos_, sequential-numeric. Off of summer’s “after the party,” or “when we wake up,” and onto the worldtime of 9:00 a.m. It was making me grumpy, a feeling counteracted only by the way the teenagers next to us were talking: “perf,” “def,” “I’m totally jeal.”

## Pop as the art of personality

Noë compares the historic concept of a composer as being a vehicle for (typically divine) music to the contemporary pop conception:

> According to this different ideal, the artist is not a vehicle for music; instead, the music is a vehicle for the artist.

Pop is "time-bound and an occasion for nostalgia" and "the art of personal style":

> This is because a pop song, but not a work of music, is precisely a positioning in a space of stylistic possibilities that is temporally and culturally local.

> When Robert Zimmerman, a Jew from Minnesota, changes his name to Bob Dylan and adopts the musical quality of traditional American folk music, he's giving more than a few nudges, winks, and nods about himself, music, the culture, his culture, and probably much more.

In this way it is an interrogation of the daily performance (see [[Opticratics]]) that is human life:

> Personhood is performed, I said above. This brings me to the second linked idea: that of performance. In one sense, “to perform” is simply the most general verb of action. We perform actions in the course of our lives. But it is also possible to distinguish between things we simply do and the actions that, in doing, we perform. It is a difficult exercise to figure out just what principle marks that line, but it has something to do with the fact that when we perform, as distinct merely from acting, we act in view of the evaluation or standards or rules and norms of others. We speak of sexual performance, performance on the job, athletic performance, performance at school, and, of course, performance on the stage. Whether you are actually subject to the evaluation of another—maybe you are practicing handstands in your room or making drawings for your eyes only—you are still performing, for what you do is open to the possible, if not the actual, assessment of others. And crucially, that’s how we experience it, too. The fact that you are alone rarely ever means you are truly alone, for almost everything we do is framed by the roles we are playing and the standards to which we are subject. Can you think of exceptions?
>
> Turning to art, we can now appreciate why it is that performance is, as in some sense it is, the most fundamental of all the arts. The performing artist makes these facts about our lives raw material for his or her own practice. We are fundamentally performers. Not as a matter of choice, and not as a matter of biology, but as an inescapable condition of being a person. A performing artist is one who places himself or herself on the stage and says, “Watch me do what I do,” all the while knowing that you are watching him or her do it.