_See also hermeneutics of suspicion, "Mommy knows best." _

A disbelief in others' stated preferences, and a belief that you know better what is best for them.

To [[Robert Pfaller]], contemporary (European) culture has a pathological [[asceticism]], a renunciation of pleasure in the service of some higher faith which generates “ever more pleasure in displeasure.” The self-denying masses, in Pfaller’s telling, eagerly advocate “supposedly necessary” austerity measures, or comply in “the neoliberal attacks on their own most immediate interests.” His is a perverse argument a priori: as a leftist, his sympathies lie with the masses, and yet the sympathies of the masses do not lie with leftism. What to do about this? Pfaller’s recourse is to cognitive dissonance, a theory of self-denial. He must posit the modern mass individual as austere and self-sacrificing in the service of an ideology which has tricked him out of his natural self-interest. This kind of stance is possible, or assisted, by similar strains of leftist political arguments about advertising and the free market, framing consumers not as rational purchasers, with a strong sense of their own self-interest, but as a vulnerable and constantly manipulated demographic that “buys crap it doesn’t need” (to paraphrase the parlance of a disgruntled liberal). Such an attitude, unsurprisingly, pairs well with authoritarianism. It is another example of Plato’s noble lie, and yet, rather than confront the complex matrix of incentives and desires that coordination requires of an individual as _The Republic_ does—e.g., all citizens might agree that they would prefer to pursue X, but freerider fears prevent their coordinating to achieve it—it challenges even the _explicit, stated preferences_ of the group in question. Like Colonial England, it imposes its own coastal values hierarchy on the “savage natives” of foreign locales, attributing any dissent to false consciousness.