_Many other precedents can be found in the entries for [[inference]] and [[perception]]. In developmental psychology, in addition to Piaget's schema, more recently we can see parallels in Theory Theory and Simulation Theory. Many rationalists, most prominently Kaj Sotala, have argued for Ecker et al's "Unlocking the Emotional Brain" as a predecessor to active inference._

"Let us assign to the nervous system the task—speaking in general terms—of mastering stimuli..." ([[Sigmund Freud]])

"Key to Husserl's analysis is the idea that the thing revealed is always revealed by means of these categorial objectivities that are projected upon the sense-data and thereby organize it. This phenomenon of projection, also known as intentionality (we actively 'intend' the significance of a thing by interpreting it in the light of our way of understanding it) is perhaps phenomenology's most fundamental idea." ([[Kenneth Liberman]])

"Every good regulator of a system must be a model of that system." (Good Regulator Theorem)

> what you see in the book of Exodus is something that’s very akin to a Piagetian stage transition. Piaget’s idea — he was a great developmental psychologist — was that people organize their perceptions into structures that have a certain amount of internal coherence. You have a structure that’s internally coherent, and it accounts for a set of phenomena in the world. But then there are phenomena that don’t fit into the structure, and they aggregate, and now and then there’s a process of punctuated equilibrium. Your old theory is no longer sufficient to account, in a practical way, for the array of phenomena that you’re now confronted with. As a consequence, there’s a dissolution of the previous system, and then a state of uncertainty and chaos, and then a reconstruction. (JBP)

[[William James]]: If there were no regularity in the world, no "universal laws" or "generic sequences," no abstract characters, then "from the experience of the past no future could be predicted; and reasoning, as we shall presently see, would be an impossibility."