# Rosenblatt 1982: The literary transaction

Louise Rosenblatt, 1982: There was a time "when simply to talk about the reader's response was considered practically subversive." The meaning of a literary text was viewed almot as if it were a "readymade," awaiting imprinting on the "blank tape" of a reader's mind. The idea of unique interpretive schemas, the cognitive fingerprints of an individual (or perhaps more accurately, a kind of DNA, the cultural programming to our genetic programming), was absent from discourse.

Rosenblatt deploys John Dewey's term "transaction": both parties, author and reader, contribute to the meaning creation. The reader brings "past experience of language and of the world to the task" (*just as the author does*). *We are still at the very rudiments of communication.* A "framework" of meaning is set up which, if "subsequent words do not fit" it, can be "revised" (*or retconned*). This process "implies a constant series of selections from the multiple possibilities offered by the text," where its components are organized into a coherent meaning *that resonants with our larger framework of predictions of what a speaker is liable to communicate*. *In other words, there are nested scales of internal coherence which themselves must be made to "add up," and the individual meanings of each nested frame is ostensibly modeled probabilistically.*

The "mental set" of the reader is the *reason* a reader has come into engagement with the text in the first place, the purpose which brings him to it. The efferent is, Rosenblatt writes, one of the most important elements in interpretation. "The reader may be seeking information, as in a textbook; he may want directions for action, as in a driver's manual; he may be seeking some logical conclusion, as in a political article. In all such reading he will narrow his attention to building up the meanings, the ideas, the directions to be retained: attention focuses on accumulating what is to be carried away at the end of the reading." Rosenblatt calls this stance **efferent** (from Latin, to carry away). Another kind of mental set is the story mode, where the experience is an ends in itself. "A much broader range of elements will be allowed to rise into consciousness, not simply the abstract concepts that the words point to, but also what those objects or referents stir up of personal feelings, ideas, and attitudes. The very sound and rhythm of the words will be attended to. Out of these ideas and feelings, a new experience, the story or poem, is shaped and lived through." Rosenblatt calls this stance **aesthetic** (from Greek "perception").

Key here is the narrowness and fullness of the different sets, which themselves are cued by an author who writes with a relative narrowness or fullness of sense of meaning. Understanding he will be taken, or read, efferently, the writer will craft differently than knowing his work will be read aesthetically.