Gossip allows the distributed policing of social norms as well as the distribution of knowledge about the relative reputations and standings of community members. Of Nafplion society, in her 1991 essay "Inside Out & Outside In: Gossip, Hospitality, and the Greek Character," Sofka Zinovieff writes that “most individuals with any good name or reputation to lose are keen to avoid being gossiped about”; women avoid even platonic friendships with men out of fear that they themselves will become subjects of gossip, which also “restricts [young women's] movements when they go out in the evenings.” Juliet du Boulay’s 1974 _Portrait of a Greek Mountain Village_ depicts children from the town of Ambeli being discouraged from behaviors that might lead to their being mocked behind their backs. This is the frame against which we can understand [[Sarah Perry]]’s contention that the “luxury” of privacy is in part a luxury of “status homeostasis.” Out of others’ sight, one’s behaviors can neither enhance or damage a reputation, freeing the host from obligations to his appearance. (Unless, of course, one is working on a project which will eventually be socially displayed—in which case one may “bring in” and simulate others’ responses, or suffer anxiety simulating potential outcomes of publicization.)

Zinovieff characters gossip as encouraging an emphasis on appearance, and as relying “on what the world sees and deduces, not on actual events and motives.” But of course, what the world sees is all the world ever knows. Novels’ brilliance, in part, comes from their impossible ability to get “inside” and “behind” things, to present them side-by-side with appearances. “People are worried by ‘what the world (or people) will say’ (_ti tha pei o kosmos_), and are concerned to adjust their behaviour to fit common expectations.” Zinovieff, citing Haviland, even goes on to describe the “individual dossiers” kept by distributors in gossip networks. But is this so exceptional to the Greek character; is it any different than the usual state of social life? To use David Mannheim and Scott Garrabant’s [frame](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1803.04585.pdf), this is regressional [[Goodhart's Law]], where a proxy selects “not only for the true goal, but also for the difference between the proxy and the goal.” To put it as best I can, a large score according to the proxy measure will correspond not only to a significant presence of the proxied-for target value, but also a large amount of noise, where noise results from the divergence between proxy measure and proxied target. In very simple terms: by selecting for reputations, we select for lying. Zinovief:

> A good reputation may well be kept through cunning, lies, and supposedly unethical or even immoral means. Thus a person may behave scandalously, and yet maintain a good social position, if he can control and restrict the knowledge of his actions. A young engaged couple spent some time telling people their holiday plans, and details of where they were travelling to, to disguise the fact that they were going to Athens for the woman to have an abortion.

And rarely is this information, after multiple retellings, especially reliable: there is the constant temptation to entertainment value, and the effect, as in the American game of Telephone (in England, Chinese Whispers; see [[telephone effect]] entry) in which a message, many times passed, is exaggerated past correspondence to ground. The social map, ravaged by attraction to narrative and the call to distinction, becomes half-recognizable from its territory.

At the same time, the family serves as a protective layer _from _gossip. Family members typically do not gossip about one another, and will usually defend one anothers’ reputations when able. We can see then a nested structure with [[superorganisms|layers]] of reputational management, protection, and contagion: a family member is motivated not only from empathy but because reputations are associative. (In this way, an entire town or community can come into shame for the behavior of a few of its members.)  

# Austen

In Jane Austen's novels, opinions (at least those shared in public) are strategic means of swaying others' opinions. This includes, most frequently, others' reputations—Mr. Knightley's distaste for Frank Churchill suddenly disappears—to the surprise of even Mr. K—when he learns he is no longer a competitor for Emma's heart. Emma speaks ill of Jane Fairfax in large part out of a similarly competitive spirit, and a sense of inferiority. The [[gossip]], judgment, policing—all [[strategic interaction|strategic]]. 

But talk is also a crucial tool for information sharing—the bad reputation of a suitor can spare a daughter from a lifetime of suffering, if it is shared in time. So social information is both this crucial channel for information sharing, but this sincere, prosocial, cooperative function gets freeridden or parasitized by those attempting to sabotage others' reputations. (See, in _[[_True Blood_]]_, Tara's slut-shaming of Jason and his hookup partners as intrasexual competition.)

# Schelling 1960: Strategic Interaction

## Reputation staking

Reputation is one of the primary ways to credibly commit to a course of action.

Reputation both establishes one as a trustworthy actor, who one can thus enter into deals with, and also creates a situation where it is rarely in the actor's self-interest to defect on a deal—the damage to his reputation, and thus his longterm social & business encounters, would be greater than the gains of cheating in a deal. By publicly committing to one line of future action, one has self-bound to that course by "staking his reputation."

Committing prestige—that is, reputation—to a course of action is one of the best ways to "commit" preemptively to a course of action. Language becomes binding when it is uttered publicly and the speaker will take a massive reputation hit if they are discovered going back on their word (this is how oaths work in systems without legal recourse: it's all about reputation in an honor culture, because reputation certifies—if trust is the basis of social interaction, mutual aid, etc then it is expensive to undermine it). This is also why companies whose entire business is built around neutral auditing can usually be trusted—almost no bribe would be enough to risk their entire reputation (read: all future business and profits) on. The dynamics here change in "endgame" scenarios, just like tit-for-tat: you burn someone on the last move, when you're already planning on closing up shop. This is part of why people defect more in endtimes. There is no future reputation worth maintaining, because there are no future negotiations to be had.

If a negotiating party is committed ("strong") then to weaken it, the other party must locate an "out"—e.g., a PR spin that protects the committed party from the reputational fallout of breaking a public linguistic commitment.

> Concession not only may be construed as capitulation, it may mark a prior commitment as a fraud, and make the adversary skeptical of any new pretense at commitment.

Predictability, consistency, continuity, and sticking to your word as core facets of reputation as a speaker and actor in the world. If one makes a verbal commitment to one course of action, but decides to concede, it is reputationally imperative that a narrative in which the concession is _not_ a reversal be found and communicated to all those who might note the inconsistency/reversal.

# Further reading

Zinovieff, Sofka. "Inside Out and Outside In: Gossip, Hospitality and the Greek Character." Journal of Mediterranean Studies 1, no. 1 (1991): 120-134. muse.jhu.edu/article/669951.

    : Discusses the (1) role of gossip as social policing and behavior deterrence and (2) the place of hospitality customs in the Greek village of Nafplion. 

