# Anton Howes, Plague of the Sea

> Some remarkable things happen to our bodies when we don’t eat fresh food for a long time. From the absence of Vitamin C alone, the waste matter of our brain builds up, and the body begins to disintegrate. Cartilage disappears, old wounds unknit, the gums weaken until the teeth fall loose, and the blood vessels leak, swelling limbs, blackening bones that have started to crack. The blood pools as blisters beneath the skin until ulcerating forth. The mind is affected too, as the brain fails to produce various hormones and neurotransmitters, leading to intense, unregulated emotions, and overwhelming senses. Sights, smells, and tastes at turns provoke intense disgust, joy, or despair — sometimes excitement enough to burst the long-weakening arteries and provoke a fatal aneurysm.

> Without the right theory of what was causing the disease, sailors just kept on dying. The sheer variety of vegetation containing vitamin C meant that often a mere return to land, from months at sea, could seemingly bring about a miraculous cure. It appeared as though it was just unnatural for people to be away from the land for too long. When the scurvy persisted even when the sick came ashore, people blamed it on the infection having taken root, on the bad air of a place, or on various other factors. They wished for one of the more specific, known cures, even while they were surrounded by the means of their salvation. Reading accounts of long-distance voyages can be heart-wrenching when you see talk of scurvy-ridden crews finally reaching land after months becalmed at sea, and then taking the fatal decision to boil their vegetables rather than eating them fresh.

Sicily was transformed by the British Navy into a lemon orchard; throughout the Atlantic and Mediterranean,
> captains took care to plant the known cures at waypoints along the long-distance routes, to have them fresh and at hand for resupply. The uninhabited island of St Helena, conveniently situated in the mid-Atlantic, was planted with thousands of orange trees by the Portuguese. These ended up saving van Neck’s expedition, mentioned above, when a hunting party stumbled across them a few days after their arrival. In the Indian Ocean van Neck himself planted orange and lemon pips on uninhabited Mauritius. The later Dutch colony at Cape Town did the same.

# IdleWords 2010, Scott & Scurvy

[5:24 PM] suspended reason: So many incredible lessons for science, inference, theory, application in these two pieces
[5:25 PM] suspended reason: Here's a nice [[indexicality]] lesson: 
> when the Admiralty began to replace lemon juice with an ineffective substitute in 1860, it took a long time for anyone to notice. In that year, naval authorities switched procurement from Mediterranean lemons to West Indian limes. The motives for this were mainly colonial - it was better to buy from British plantations than to continue importing lemons from Europe. Confusion in naming didn't help matters. Both "lemon" and "lime" were in use as a collective term for citrus, and though European lemons and sour limes are quite different fruits, their Latin names (citrus medica, var. limonica and citrus medica, var. acida) suggested that they were as closely related as green and red apples. Moreover, as there was a widespread belief that the antiscorbutic properties of lemons were due to their acidity, it made sense that the more acidic Caribbean limes would be even better at fighting the disease.

[5:26 PM] suspended reason: Even after discovering a cure for scurvy, their generalization/theorization of it—that the acid cured scurvy—and a naming conflation—citrus medica—led them to implement a totally ineffective substitute
[5:27 PM] suspended reason: It's incredible, 100% we have the same problematic naming conflations in modern inexact sciences, the same generalization issues
[5:27 PM] suspended reason: I feel like you could just substitute that one paragraph for Yarkoni's entire "Generalizability Crisis." Get fucked!!
[5:29 PM] suspended reason:
> By the 1870s, therefore, most British ships were sailing without protection against scurvy. Only speed and improved nutrition on land were preventing sailors from getting sick. It fell to the unfortunate George Nares to discover this fact in 1875, when he led the British Arctic Expedition in an attempt to reach the North Pole via Greenland.... The expedition was a fiasco. Two men in the sledging party developed scurvy within days of leaving the ship.... Most damning of all, some of the men who stayed on the ship, never failing to take their daily dose, also got scurvy. The failure of the Nares expedition provoked an uproar in Britain. The Royal Navy believed itself capable of sustaining any crew for two years without signs of scurvy, yet here was an able and adequately supplied crew crippled by the disease within weeks. For the first time since the eighteenth century, the effectiveness of citrus juice as an absolute preventative was in doubt.

[5:29 PM] suspended reason: It all feels so damn contemporary
[5:30 PM] suspended reason: You can almost hear the British aristocrats going "The year is 1875. We live in the era of science, the pinnacle of man's creation and knowledge, and our so-called government experts can't distinguish a lemon from a lime."
[5:31 PM] suspended reason:
> Rather than being recognised as a simple deficiency, scurvy was generally thought to be an infection — cloudberries, scurvygrass, citrus, turnips, and the arborvitae were seen as specific cures, when actually any fresh vegetation would have done the trick. Even vitamin C itself, discovered in the 1920s, was named ascorbic acid or ascorbate, after the latinised word for scurvy, scorbutus. Ascorbic acid thus came to be named for the prevention of its own mere absence.

[5:32 PM] suspended reason: The rationalizations, the fake explanations, the subtle differences that make a difference—copper pots destroy Vitamin C, boiling destroys Vitamin C ("Its destruction is also rapidly catalyzed by copper ions, which may be one reason sailors, with their big copper cooking vats, were particularly susceptible.")
[5:39 PM] suspended reason: And of course, in the wake of the breakdown of authority and expertise on scurvy, all sorts of fake theories popped up and persevered for decades. Here's how the backers of these now falsified theories sounded—look how often they use "practically certain"—this being the result of basically an n=1. And it makes sense, if your crew was eating lime everyday, and half of them ate fresh meat, and half ate salted preserved meat, and only the latter group got sick, you'd feel "practically certain" it was a problem with the meat! And in a sense, you'd even be right! The local example was true; the fresh meat had VitC in it, which kept the fresh meat eaters alive. It's the generalization that ended up being so problematic and misleading:

> That the cause of the outbreak of scurvy in so many Polar expeditions has always been that something was radically wrong with the preserved meats, whether tinned or salted, is practically certain; that foods are scurvy-producing by being, if only slightly, tainted is practically certain; that the benefit of the so-called "antiscorbutics" is a delusion, and that some antiscorbutic property has been removed from foods in the process of preservation is also a delusion. An animal food is either scorbutic—in other words, scurvy-producing—or it is not. It is either tainted or it is sound. Putrefactive change, if only slight and tasteless, has taken place or it has not. Bacteria have been able to produce ptomaines in it or they have not; and if they have not, then the food is healthy and not scurvy-producing.

[5:41 PM] suspended reason: So as late as the 20th C, this is how an Antarctic expedition went:
> [The captain Scott] made sure that before being served, all tins were opened in the presence of his medical staff, including Dr. Koettlitz, and carefully examined for signs of spoilage. Any doubtful cans were consigned to the trash heap.

[5:42 PM] suspended reason: Three weeks later, a team of his men come back from a sledding expedition with scurvy
[5:42 PM] suspended reason:
> Koettlitz predicted that as long as there was fresh seal meat available “we can take it as certain that no scurvy will be heard of in connexion with the expedition, however long it may remain in the High South.”

[5:42 PM] suspended reason: This fuckin guy is so fuckin certain! Thinks he knows everything!
[5:42 PM] suspended reason: The enemy of science was never "experts"—it was always [[hubris]]
[5:50 PM] suspended reason: And the stigma that prevents proper recording of anecdotal data:

> Both Scott and Wilson would have easily recognized the symptoms, but it is possible that they would have chosen not to record them. There was a certain stigma with scurvy, especially in their case, having taken such pains to forestall the disease. Scott had nearly left any mention of scurvy out of his 1903 report, before deciding to do so for the cause of science, and it’s possible he felt a similar reticence now.

[5:51 PM] suspended reason:

> with regard to scurvy, at least, the Polar explorers were in an impossible position. They had a theory of the disease that made sense, fit the evidence, but was utterly wrong. They had arrived at the idea of an undetectable substance in their food, present in trace quantities, with a direct causative relationship to scurvy, but they thought of it in terms of a poison to avoid. In one sense, the additional leap required for a correct understanding was very small. In another sense, it would have required a kind of Copernican revolution in their thinking.

[5:54 PM] suspended reason: The eventual discovery in 1907 was "pure luck"—"[researchers] serendipitously chose guinea pigs, the one animal besides human beings and monkeys that requires vitamin C in its diet." And was met by an uproar of controversy and disbelief—"the concept of nutritional deficiencies was a novelty at the time"—until a 1930 discovery of Vitamin C confirmed it.
[5:56 PM] suspended reason: So the general trajectory: 1497 we have the first discovery in Europe that oranges/lemons cure scurvy; it took til about 1800 for that knowledge to spread and become institutionalized in the British navy; an [[indexicality]] issue in the mid-1800s led to the cure being lost for 50 more years until in 1907 the first real scientific study seemed to confirm a deficiency model, and then finally in 1930 we actually had a concrete discovery (VitC) that actually explained the variation in efficacy between lemons and limes.
[5:57 PM] suspended reason: That's a crazy timeline. It says a lot about knowledge logistics, and what we ought to expect generally—that a lot more is known, concretely and locally, by some people in practice, than what is officially and widely and uncontroversially believed and endorsed by mainstream science
[6:01 PM] suspended reason: The author's takeaways, at the end of the piece, are quite good too. His point about how the first experiments discovering the efficacy of oranges were conducted on an n=2 is after @crispy_chicken's "[[other kinds of inference]]" heart. The final takeaway: 

> one of the simplest of diseases managed to utterly confound us for so long, at the cost of millions of lives, even after we had stumbled across an unequivocal cure. It makes you wonder how many incurable ailments of the modern world—depression, autism, hypertension, obesity—will turn out to have equally simple solutions, once we are able to see them in the correct light.