## Paglia 1992: Sexual Personae's Cancelled Preface

> Western personality thus originates in the idea of mask. Society is the place of masks, a ritual theater. Persona's artistic origins were recovered by modernism and the [[New Criticisim]], which stripped the text of biographical baggage. For the New Critics, a writer never speaks for himself but only through an assumed persona, a mask. Following World War Two, the classroom set piece was Jonathan Swift's _A Modest Proposal_, where a self-absorbed voice, airily proposing the cannibalistic farming of Irish infants, is the butt of the author's satire. [[knowingness|Irony]] and game-playing are central to this view of literature and life. The New Critical persona was indebted to Jung, who sees a split between our inner and ouer selves, an authentic psychic reality versus the mask conforming to social expectation. Popularized Jungianism, especially in its American feminist form, has become increasingly Rousseauist; that is, it tends to view society as automatically restrictve or oppresive instead of educative or civilizing.

## T. [[Tanner Greer|Greer]] 2020: On Sparks Before the Prairie Fire

> Hobbes famously described society absent state authority as a "warre of all against all," a time where there is "no propriety, no dominion, no ‘mine’ and ‘thine’ distinct, but only that to be every man’s that he can get, and for so long as he can keep it." Many assume that the savagery of Hobbes vision is grounded in a particularly dark view of human nature. This is not true: far from believing that humanity was incurably tainted by sin, Hobbes denied the category of sin altogether. Hobbes was a committed amoralist. Vice and virtue, he maintained, were arbitrary categories, fictions summoned by authority to keep society smoothly running. What we label villainous was not a matter of character, but incentive; the source of human savagery was not evil, but uncertainty. Strip the commanding powers of their strength to revenge wrongs done and deter wrongs not yet done, and what happens? Humanity is left in an untenable position. Facing potential danger, each clump of mankind must themselves become a danger. For
>
> _there is no way for any man to secure himself so reasonable as anticipation, that is, by force or wiles to master the persons of all men he can so long till he see no other power great enough to endanger him... if others, that otherwise would be glad to be at ease within the modest bounds, should not by invasion increase their power, they would not be able long time, by standing only on their defence, to subsist._ (Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan, or The Matter, Form, and Power of a Commonwealth, Ecclesiastical and Civil (1651), Book I, Chapter XIII)
>
> The logic of Hobbseian disorder requires neither the fires of rage nor the heats of jealousy. Its downward course requires only the cold recognition that in a world of uncertainty, "augmentation of dominion over men [becomes] necessary to a man’s conservation." There is no exit from a society that has slipped down these slopes. Even he who yearns for peace knows that "if other men will not lay down their right [to arms] as well as he, then there is no reason for any one to divest himself of his; for that were to expose himself to prey, which no man is bound to, rather than to dispose himself to peace." Thus violence starts, then grows, and is not tamed until some sovereign power has gathered enough force to jam the jinn back in its bottle.

## Graeber & Wengrow 2018: How to change the course of human history

Graeber & Wengrow argue that Rousseau's Edenic mythos, which began not as a historical or anthropological claim but as a thought experiment about the ways our desire for liberation can lead us to chains, has become the default way that our society thinks about our prehistory. Once, we lived in small bands of hunter-gatherers, free from inequality and subsisting in harmony with nature. Agriculture, and then cities, led to governments and inequality. These bands were the "childhood" of our species; we have "grown up" into our current hierarchical structure, which is necessary for organizing large groups of people.

> received wisdom on the overall course of human history [...] goes something a little like this: As the curtain goes up on human history – say, roughly two hundred thousand years ago, with the appearance of anatomically modern Homo sapiens – we find our species living in small and mobile bands ranging from twenty to forty individuals. They seek out optimal hunting and foraging territories, following herds, gathering nuts and berries. If resources become scarce, or social tensions arise, they respond by moving on, and going someplace else. Life for these early humans – we can think of it as humanity’s childhood – is full of dangers, but also possibilities. Material possessions are few, but the world is an unspoiled and inviting place. Most work only a few hours a day, and the small size of social groups allows them to maintain a kind of easy-going camaraderie, without formal structures of domination. Rousseau, writing in the 18th century, referred to this as ‘the State of Nature,’ but nowadays it is presumed to have encompassed most of our species’ actual history. It is also assumed to be the only era in which humans managed to live in genuine societies of equals, without classes, castes, hereditary leaders, or centralised government.

> At this point, we find our imaginary human actors scattered across the world’s continents, beginning to farm their own crops and raise their own herds. Whatever the local reasons (they are debated), the effects are momentous, and basically the same everywhere. Territorial attachments and private ownership of property become important in ways previously unknown, and with them, sporadic feuds and war. Farming grants a surplus of food, which allows some to accumulate wealth and influence beyond their immediate kin-group. Others use their freedom from the food-quest to develop new skills, like the invention of more sophisticated weapons, tools, vehicles, and fortifications, or the pursuit of politics and organised religion. In consequence, these ‘Neolithic farmers’ quickly get the measure of their hunter-gatherer neighbours, and set about eliminating or absorbing them into a new and superior – albeit less equal – way of life.

> To make matters more difficult still, or so the story goes, farming ensures a global rise in population levels. As people move into ever-larger concentrations, our unwitting ancestors take another irreversible step to inequality, and around 6,000 years ago, cities appear – and our fate is sealed. With cities comes the need for centralised government. New classes of bureaucrats, priests, and warrior-politicians install themselves in permanent office to keep order and ensure the smooth flow of supplies and public services. Women, having once enjoyed prominent roles in human affairs, are sequestered, or imprisoned in harems. War captives are reduced to slaves. Full-blown inequality has arrived, and there is no getting rid of it. Still, the story-tellers always assure us, not everything about the rise of urban civilization is bad. Writing is invented, at first to keep state accounts, but this allows terrific advances to take place in science, technology, and the arts. At the price of innocence, we became our modern selves, and can now merely gaze with pity and jealousy at those few ‘traditional’ or ‘primitive’ societies that somehow missed the boat.

