Stereotype is a form of inference and pattern-matching along axes that we find unpalettable, or overly gross.
# Hazard 2021: Intuitionisitc Type (of guy) Theory
> Constructing a new Type of guy happens in two phases. The first phase constructs the Type by pointing to a recognizable behavior or set of behaviors, reifying what had previously been unpatterned information into an Essence ("Type of guy who reads David Foster Wallace on the L train"). The second phase passes Judgment on the newly constructed Type, asserting a proper valence, a position in some local status hierarchy, or an appropriate level of disdain/condescension/pity to direct. In this way, a Type is a label that embodies a decision rule. If [recognizable traits] then [treat this way]. Here's how to spot it, here's how to react. It seems like the most common way to react is some variation of dismissal. You recognize the Type, you roll your eyes, and you stop listening.

# Hotel Concierge: The Tower
> Contrary to the pop-ethical consensus, discrimination is not caused by having too many stereotypes but too few. If you wake to find a lithe man dressed in all black standing over your bed and holding a katana, it may be quite reasonable to infer that he is a hired ninja and that you are in grave danger. If, however, you assume this about every East Asian man that you encounter, you lack nuance of stereotypes. If you want to insert a more topical example, go ahead, it should be obvious however that misunderstanding can result in racist outcomes even without conscious ill-will. Example: stories about disparities in use of Emergency Room analgesia make the headlines about once a year. My observation has been that there are certain culturally accepted ways to express pain, some verbal (saying “I have a high pain tolerance” suggests the opposite) and some nonverbal (wrong ratio of gritted teeth to screaming). When ordering the Dilaudid, physicians unconsciously underestimate the pain of patients who didn’t dot the i’s and cross the t’s of their agony, or, less charitably, unconsciously realize that an undocumented migrant is less likely to write a complaint letter than the hawk-like Shakespeare professor who has given two stars to every book club novel for the past 45 years.

> What’s less obvious is that the mere existence of a stereotype is harmful... this very old very fundamental feeling of being misconstrued, of one’s memes being stymied somewhere out in the ether, of one’s legacy going down wrong, a feeling closely related to shame and to which the response is, invariably, rage.

> This particular flavor of suffering spares the privileged: historically, straight white males. They had the money so they got the education so they defined class so they controlled the language so they spread the most stories, any of which can serve as template for “white dude.” This says nothing about acuity of suffering, only that such suffering can be communicated more easily and with more nuance. “I’m not Elliott Smith depressed today—it’s more of a Bright Eyes feel. Know what I mean, officer?” “No lies, just love, sir. You have a nice day.”