# Heylighen 2016: "Stigmergy as a universal coordination mechanism"

> *stigmergy is an indirect, mediated mechanism of coordination between actions, in which the trace of an action left on a medium stimulates the performance of a subsequent action.*

> The concept of stigmergy was proposed by the French entomologist Pierre-Paul Grassé (Grassé, 1959) to describe a mechanism of coordination used by insects. **The principle is that work performed by an agent leaves a trace in the environment that stimulates the performance of subsequent work—by the same or other agents. This mediation via the environment ensures that tasks are executed in the right order, without any need for planning, control, or direct interaction between the agents.** The notion of stigmergy allowed Grassé to solve the “coordination paradox” (Theraulaz and Bonabeau, 1999), i.e. the question of how insects of very limited intelligence, without apparent communication, manage to collaboratively tackle complex projects, such as building a nest. 
> The insight came from Grassé’s observation of how termites repair their nest. He noted that initially termites wander around more or less randomly, carrying mud and depositing it here or there. However, the deposits that are created in this haphazard way then stimulate the insects to add more mud in the same place. Thus, the small heaps quickly grow into columns that eventually come together to form an intricate cathedral of interlocking arches. The only communication between the termites is indirect: the partially executed work of the ones provides information to the others about where to make their own contribution.
> With the advent of the agent-based paradigm in computer simulation, insect societies were conceptualized as [[swarm theory|swarms]] of simple agents that are able to perform complex tasks using various forms of self-organization and especially stigmergy (Deneubourg, Theraulaz and Beckers, 1992). The general ability to tackle complex problems exhibited by such self-organizing multi-agent collectives became known as swarm intelligence (Bonabeau, Dorigo and Theraulaz, 1999; Kennedy, 2006). 
> Probably the best-known example of stigmergic self-organization is the “[[capitalism|invisible hand]]” of the market: the actions of buying and selling leave a trace by affecting the price of the transacted commodities. This price in turn stimulates further transactions. 

# Christensen, “Stigmergy in human practice”:

> Building on Grassé (1959), we will argue that that a coordinative effect can occur when human individuals act on the physical traces of work accomplished previously by others.

> stigmergy is always part of cooperative work in the sense that stigmergy by definition is the integration of interdependent work task by virtue of individuals acting on the physical traces of work previously accomplished by others

> In construction work, as in building design (Christensen, 2007; 2008), interdependent tasks may be partly integrated by virtue of individuals paying heed to the material evidence of work previously accomplished by others while performing their own tasks. Cooperative construction work tasks may be integrated through practices of stigmergy. As a case in point we shall consider the integration of cooperative work tasks pertaining to the construction of interior walls in a large building project. In the interior construction stage of a large building project a considerable number of partition walls are constructed. Partition walls are what divide the building into for instance units of office space. The construction of these walls is a cooperative work process involving a number of different trades such as carpenters, electricians and painters (see figure 2). The first and second frame shows the result of the carpenter’s initial efforts. The third frame, including insert, shows the work of the electrician in progress. Finally, the fourth frame depicts the closed wall ready for painting. The initial parts of a partition wall is constructed by a carpenter in the form of a frame made of light weight steel grinders fitted with plasterboards on the one side. At a later point in time, another actor, namely, an electrician will arrive and pay heed to the work carried out and seek to align the wiring of the electrical circuits with it. That is, the electrician will drill holes in the plasterboard to accommodate the electrical instillations and he or she will pull electrical cables through little holes in the vertical steel grinders of the frame and connect them to the electrical system as a whole. When the electrician is done and has left the scene, the carpenter returns to close the wall i.e. clad the second side of the wall in plasterboards in accordance with the previous work done. That is, the carpenter must take notice of the work previously performed by himself and the electrician as he seeks to put up the second round of plasterboards. Subsequently, the painter shows up to paint what the others have erected. At this point the wall in-the-making will have been worked on to consist of a steel frame, plasterboards on the first side, electrical instillations inside, and plasterboards on the second side. Finding the wall in this state the painter paints the wall with several coats of paint. In this manner the work ensemble including carpenter, electrician and painter all make distinct contributions towards the construction of the wall in accordance with their respective areas of expertise. We could say that the individual actor creates and changes the form of the wall in-the-making, not for the purpose of conveying a message, but simply as part of performing their individually allotted tasks, in turn another actor pays heed to and acts upon the material evidence of the work of others. This is partly how the cooperative work tasks pertaining to the construction of partition walls are integrated through practice of stigmergy. Perhaps to allow for full appreciation of the importance of this mode of coordination in building construction work, it would prudent to recall that no formal construct (e.g. architectural plan) exhaustively stipulates a concrete practice. Plans are underspecified with respect to that which is represented (Suchman, 1987), and architectural plans for the construction of for example partition walls are no exception. The actors have to “fill in the blanks” for themselves, so to speak, and acting on the evidence of work previously accomplished by others may be said to be one way of doing this. Furthermore, please bear in mind that architectural plans for specific building parts such as walls are not assembly manuals like those that come with for example IKEA furniture, rather architectural plans represent mainly how parts of the building it are supposed to look in the final state. Consequently, the assembly of for example partition walls is not covered in architectural plans. In addition, the pace of contemporary construction work is such that as soon as one actor (e. g. carpenter) has completed a task, time does not allow for much standing around and talking to the next actor (e. g. electrician) even though their tasks are interdependent and there are numerous details that need to be integrated. Of course articulation work through talk on the building site or in weekly coordination meetings may contribute to the integration of cooperative construction work tasks, but so may acting on the material evidence of work previously accomplished. The point is that in addition to various kinds of articulation work in meetings and with and without coordinative artifacts such as time schedules, cooperative construction work is coordinated by virtue of actors paying heed to the material evidence of work previously accomplished by others while performing their own tasks. At this juncture we may ask if the physical “evidence” of work may be promoted by the way in which the work is performed making it more straightforward for others to act on in practice of stigmergy? With reference to our case above, we may say that an electrician could for example install the electrical wiring and let a cable hang conspicuously visible in order to make the carpenter pay heed to it and afford it the required space as the wall is closed with the second layer of plasterboards (if the cables are completely hidden to the carpenters view he or she may accidentally put a nail through it with the nail gun as the second layer of plasterboards are mounted on the frame of the wall). This raises an interesting point: coordination through the material field of work may also be a matter of being mindful of the work that is to be performed by others looking forward in time, rather than only a matter of paying heed to work previously accomplished by others. At this point we may remind ourselves “the economy of logic […] dictates that no more logic is mobilized than is required by the needs of practice” (Bourdieu, 1992, p. 145). Following Bourdieu, we may say that the individual actors will engage in no more physical and cognitive effort than is practically necessary. That is, unless an actor has practical reasons for considering the situation from the perspective of others such as for example subsequent actors that may follow in practices of stigmergy, he or she will retain his or her own perspective and just carry out the work without though for the perspectives of others. Note that it is of course an empirical matter, something that differs from case to case, exactly how this plays out in practice. It is important to note that stigmergy, as a coordinative practice, is in not dependant on such forward looking mindfulness although it may be part of the larger set of practices. In sum, in construction work, cooperative work tasks are (partly) integrated through practices of stigmergy.

  
# Reflection / response  

[[Pierre Bourdieu]] 1992:
> The actor, having deeply internalised the regularities of the game, does what he must do, at the moment it is necessary, without the need to ask [himself] explicitly what needs to be done. He does not need consciously to know what he does in order to do it and even less to raise explicitly the question (except in some critical situations) of knowing explicitly what others might do in return.

[[Generalized reading]] more or less eliminates the need for concepts like "stigmergy" (which in its broad form can be applied to virtually any form of coordination). In our frame, proper execution of a task, by one engulfed in a larger coordinative project, requires (naturally and inevitably) some degree of contextual sensitivity. That is, for an actor to productively advance some larger project undertaken by many other actors, he must have some sense of task-salient conditions (what "is") in order to determine the necessary actions that will eventually result in the larger project's "ought" (whether he understands the contribution of his actions to a "delta" which brings about this ought or not). To put it in game terms, one must have a sense of the game “state,” at least those aspects of the state which are relevant to one’s own play and outcomes, in order to determine which move to make. Selection of a move is the product of interfacing one’s goals, one’s sense of state, and one’s mechanistic forecast—how one anticipates different moves to changing the state, and how this changed state relates to one’s goal states. 

Thus, coordinating actors, if their actions contribute productively to the consuming project, must "read" their environment in some way. Because an exhaustive understanding of all possibly relevant environmental facts is impossible, they proceed with some sense of the commonly relevant ambiguities. Anticipating this, actors will also "write" the environment, as they create it, in order to better clue other actors into certain task-salient details—either to make this reading process easier, or to draw attention to certain details which otherwise might have been missed in the reading. Thus, part of contributing to such a coordinative project is not just the accomplishment of a task, but accomplishing it in such a way that any ambiguities of one's own intervention which are mission-relevant to other coordinating actors is legible. In an evolved setting, either an organism’s ability to read previous organisms’ contribution must improve, or organism’s ability to write to alter future organisms’ to their own intrinsic work must improve, and almost certainly there is a converge caused by improvements on both sides. This legibilization or "writing" can be accomplished either by literal speech, or any other action (creating an artifact, leaving behind a sign, pointing) which helps future readers advance the interpretation that will be necessary to contributing their own part.

To bring this back to the original example by Grasse, for a termite colony to be built, termites must have some degree of contextual sensitivity to where they place their saliva-and-dirty clods. This sensitivity can be "Markov" style, where the contextual sensitivity is to recent actors/actions, or an overall "state" reading; depending on the task, either can be sufficient. The relevant ambiguity, for such a termite, in order to eventually and collaboratively create a colony, is (to simplify) whether or not there are existing saliva-and-dirt clods in that location. 

To extend this to a project like Wikipedia, for a useful encyclopedia to be built, contributors must have contextual sensitivity in their contributions. They must add information relevant to the page topic, which isn't redundant with existing information, which conforms to a certain style, etc. Thus they must resolve certain ambiguities or unknowns, for instance, whether a certain fact has already been mentioned, or how a certain citation is formatted, and they do this by literally reading the subject entry at hand, and perhaps other pages of relevance, in order to orient themselves to make an effective contribution. 

What are the situations in which one would not need contextual sensitivity to help contribute to a larger goal? The only example that comes to my mind is simple aggregation. If there is no interaction between parts necessary to achieve some end, then it is irrelevant what other actors have already done. Are there situations in which one can be contextually sensitive without reading the room? Almost definitionally, I think not, except by sheer luck, which is necessarily unreliable at scale.

Note, however, that “agents taking cues from other agents”—that is, other agents reading agents’s actions, even if only in artifactual (“trace”) form—is not sufficient to coordination, even as it is necessary. Cue-taking from the environment is definitional to intelligence—to be “dumb” is just to be context insensitive—and as other agents constitute a significant part of the genetically-relevant environment, cue-taking from other agents is an inescapable part of what it means to be an agent. Once reading is established, writing naturally results, as agents attempt to manipulate one another by altering one another’s assessments of reality. But the ends of generalized reading and writing are basically selfish, which is why normal ecology—the inter-species, Darwinian fight for survival, which “constructs” nothing, and marked by deep competition—is characterized by such practices.

Thus we are in searching of missing links, which can bring us from what is etymologically (abstractly minimal conditions) “stigmergy”—action based on actor-produced sign—to what is more conventionally thought of as “stigmergy”—the collaborative construction of a shared structure that benefits the group. We can note here that the term originally comes from eusocial organisms: that is, organisms for which the survival of any individual, and the survival of the group, are identical concerns. In other words, selfishness is identical to selflessness, and thus the normally selfish rationale for reading and writing is functionally selfless, resulting in group benefit. As for the “structure” that is implicit in a termite colony, or the system of pheromone trails ants use for hunting and gathering, it may or may not be necessary to specify that the coordinated project is somehow “structural,” but it is certainly more impressive if a complex, sizeable structure is built by simple, locally-optimizing organisms. Next, there is the implicit temporal ordering. Actors acting simultaneously cannot coordinate in stigmergy. They must be at least slightly temporally delayed, so that their decision can “build” linearly on the decisions of those before them, rather than being made synchronously. The decisions happen one at a time. Finally, there is the “artifactual” quality of stigmergy, whereby in the natural doing of work, cues are just created, as a byproduct, which are sufficient to disambiguate for future actors which action to take.  In the case of the termites, the pheromones are already contained within the saliva that helps bind the nest; while it is difficult to speculate as to evolutionary origins, we can at least say that at present, no extra action, intelligence, or intent is necessary for the actors to write, beyond the going about of the primary activity, for other termites to successfully "read" (successfully in terms of, the necessary disambiguation required to achieve the end result) the project state, which is to say, to successfully act. 

Stigmergy in the tight sense, then, is a specific kind of coordination; in the broad sense, it is merely a necessary but not sufficient condition for coordination itself.