
# Eckert 2019: The limits of meaning

Many self-representations cannot merely be stated because they are not deemed to be left "up to" the individual self-representing to decide. These include attributes like high status, desirability, intelligence, charisma, and similarly positive traits—traits which are qualitative and which it is in an individual's interest to deceptively self-represent (they are biased, or compromised, as authorities), or that are otherwise "in the eye of the observer"—these attributes the individual still wishes to maximize; he still wishes to appear desirable, or intelligent, but his word will not suffice. This is a case of "actions speaking louder than words": he must present costly signals which will be evaluated in somewhat but limitedly predictable ways by his interlocutor.

> Style is performative in that it creates a persona (Coupland 2007)—a self-presentation that takes on meaning in, and with respect to, the social-semiotic landscape (Eckert 2019). The notion of social landscape is a perspective on social structure from the ground—that is, people perceive social structure in terms of the patterned types of personae who inhabit and constitute structural categories. It is common to speak of identity in this context, but persona gets more directly at the speaker’s indexical behavior without implications of a stable sense of self or identification with social groups or categories. It is a fluid self-construction that signals the kind of person we claim to be in the situation. The importance of assessing the ‘kind of person’ cannot be overemphasized, as it sets up expectations of common ground, provides the predictability necessary for embarking on an interaction (Goffman 1959, Meyerhoff 2001), and serves as essential context for semantic and pragmatic construal.