# [[John Nerst]] 2019: The prince and the figurehead

> Instead of having a unified mind we have one with two parts. One of them is what Simler and Hanson call the PR officer — basically our conscious self, honestly convinced of its own goodness and correctness. It gets fed partial and often spun information from the other part: a shadowy figure outside consciousness that looks after our interests and makes sure the self doesn’t have to get its hands dirty.

> Given how Machiavellian the hidden part is I think we should call it _The Prince_. “PR officer” is a little pessimistic for the conscious self (although good for making the point of [ [[Robin Hanson]]'s] _Elephant [in the Brain]_), since it can — if it really tries and knows what to look for — question and critically examine what the Prince is feeding it. It can also assert power if so inclined. I prefer to call it _The Figurehead,_ because while relegated to partially ceremonial duties we _are_ the rightful monarchs of our own states and we can make the effort to actually rule, with wisdom and integrity. Or we can keep standing on the balcony, waving at the crowd, unwittingly providing cover for the dirty operations of state.

> I don’t mean to say that this Prince and Figurehead model is neurologically correct or anything. I see it more like Freud’s division of the mind into Id, Ego and Superego — “wrong”, but useful enough to be worth keeping in mind and take out now and then. It would be a good thing if the Prince and the Figurehead were as well known as that trio.

> With this model we could stop confusing ourselves by thinking that actions are either intentional or unintentional, because either one is going to be wrong and will mislead us if we use it as a starting point for our thinking. While the model is applicable to much of our behavior I think it’s especially helpful for understanding rhetorical misrepresentation. It (and the strategic use of principles and objections) is the result of two parts of the mind working together with _neither_ having full agency. The Prince doesn’t have self-awareness or a conscience, and the Figurehead doesn’t have all the facts. Together they produce not intentional nor unintentional actions, but, _semitentional_ ones. Semitentional actions shouldn’t be considered just half of each, but as something qualitatively different.