Humans are socially sensitive: many of their values, beliefs, and desires are social products, the historical result of social training. They are pushed and pulled by the support or criticism their actions receive. Their actions are determined by _reactions_. 

# Explicit vs tacit training

_See subsection on tacit coordination, in the [[Strategic Interaction]] entry._

Training can occur deontologically or consequentially, that is, through [[imitation]] or [[emulation]], respectively. Deontological training minimizes the evolution and adaptation of practices. Consequential training runs into wireheading and Goodhart problems a la [[surrogation]] and [[degeneration#Degenerate play|degenerate play]]. This is the difference between following someone around at the office and being given target methods.

Most human learning and coordination occurs tacitly. How do members learn to tacitly coordinate, and maintain congenial expectations? Through an "attunement" to one anothers "full bodily and somatic presence," subtle cues of affirmation, surprise, confusion, disappointment, etc. (The "surprising ability of humans to read each other" [Pentland 2008] and perform face-work, as explored by Rochat, Tomasello and many other thinkers.)

> Learning emerges from tacit coordination because, very generally speaking, the confirmation of expectations is pleasant and the frustration of expectations is unpleasant. Powerful emotions such as shame and embarrassment are involved in acquiring socially appropriate expectations and respective preferences. Rather than a list of verbally formulated expectations or definitions of situations that players would memorize, the general result is a habitualized feeling of appropriateness (Bourdieu 1990). Tacit coordination, by virtue of of keeping appropriateness mostly implicit rather than making it an issue of conversation, will tend to result in knowledge that is common among participants but at the same time to a large extent tacit.

A repeated run of tacit coordination problems leads to a construction of norms, or [[social reality]]. Individuals in a community "train" one another socially, and settle on "focal points that become conventional." Schelling 1960:

> The force of many rules of etiquette and social restrain, including some (like the rule against ending a sentence with a proposition) that have been divested of their relevance and authority, seems to depend on their having become "solutions" to a coordination game: everyone expects everyone to expect everyone to expect observance, so that nonobservance carries the pain of conspicuousness.

This, as [[Thomas Schelling|Schelling]] notes, helps maintain an organizational culture over its Ship-of-Theseus lifespan. Just as the planks of the ship, one-by-one replaced, are fitted into the holes and structure of the whole, the system of norms inducts new members into its logic; these new members go on, once trained, to uphold many of the same norms and values as previous generations' members.

# Today's payoff structure determines tomorrow's production function

As Bourdieu has  written extensively on, our actions in the world are shaped by our positions and dispositions, the overlap between our own desires and the desires of others. We observe and orient toward payoffs as they appear to us, and these payoffs form an incentives matrix: the work we can do to earn cash, the work we can do to earn reputation. This forms the space of possibles (what is acceptable) and the space of productivities (what is rewarded). From this we chart a path in life.

This interaction between desires—our own and of those around us—is made explicit in grant funding. We can take the visual arts as an example: an interaction between the desires of a government or nonprofit _funding agency_^[Where do these desires come from? More or less, the source of the funding. In the private realm, this is the patron who has established the fund. In the public realm, bureaucrats, in part, and politicians; indirectly, there is some meaningful way in which they derive from the public insofar as decision-makers are answerable to the public.] and a _supplicating party_ such as a gallery, museum, or artist. The funding agency provides grant listings with linguistic _premises_: an explicit description of the fund’s telos (spirit) and criteria (letter). The supplicating party makes a case for how its work, whether a specific project or general organizational mission, synchronizes, furthers, and fulfills a grant’s premise. Sometimes, this supplicating party will significantly modify its project’s dimensions to more closely accord with the funding premise; more often, they will “throw a bone” in its direction: a symbolic or surface adjustment to programming is made made which moves the supplicator closer to the premise, and any remaining discrepancy is made up through marketing (massaged language). There are still, of course, strong filter effects—many organizations pass on certain grants because its criteria are objectively unfulfillable short of falsifiable lying (e.g. about demographic statistics at the org). But conditional on a “general ballpark” of fulfillment, most grant writing is about massaging an institution’s profile and mission to match a premise’s criteria and telos.

Similar mechanisms occur in publications’ open calls for writing submissions, and for “themed issues” at a magazine or newspaper. Slightly less explicitly, but with the same dynamics at heart, the existing proclivities and habits of published, recognized, and legitimated work are internalized by those who aspirationally wish to publish on similar platforms: editors are understood to have a style and focus, which limit what they will select, and therefore guide production. The same mechanism is found in music and the arts: the competitive grappling for space, and the mere fact that there certain patterns of behavior and production are rewarded at higher rates than other patterns, is enough to enable strategy. Whatever is, at a given moment, appearing publicly as a successful strategy of legitimization is quickly imitated;^[In institutions, and with respect to corruption, the same mechanism holds: to do otherwise—to neglect demonstratedly successful strategies—would be to practice “integrity”—the “right” thing, unrewarded—which is hardly a reliable state of affairs for an organization tasked with a responsibility to public good.] Joe Henrich’s work on mimesis in prestige cultures enumerates the dynamic well. Attention is attracted toward success; respect is given largely on the basis of respect given, in other words, it is [[reflexivity|reflexive]] the economic sense, where rising prices drive rising prices, where evaluations are based on prior evaluations, what has been called "herd behavior" or a "Keynesean beauty contest." In a field where economic reflexivity is innate and dominant, bubbles and crashes represent normal functioning.

In a short blog post, a recent medical school graduate describes his time volunteering for a clinic in impoverished Haiti:

> [Haitians have the mindset that] getting more medicine of any type is always a good thing and will make them healthier, and doctors are these strange heartless people who will prevent them from taking a stomach medication just because maybe they don’t have a stomach problem at this exact moment. As a result, they lie like heck. I didn’t realize exactly how much they were lying until I heard the story, now a legend at our clinic, of the man who came in complaining of vaginal discharge. He had heard some woman come in complaining of vaginal discharge and get lots of medication for it, so he figured he should try his luck with the same. And this wasn’t an isolated incident, either. Complaints will go in “fads,” so that if a guy comes in complaining of ear pain and gets lots of medicine, on his way out he’ll mention it to the other patients in line and they’ll all mention ear pain too—or so the translators and veteran staff have told me.

In short: Today’s payoffs determine tomorrow’s strategy of appearance.