---
aliases: taboo your words
---

_See also [[linguistic conquests]], [[concepts]]._

# Pragmatism

In the pragmatic frame, verbal disputes are situations in which two different concepts, statements, or verbal assessments render the same predictions; insofar as two theories make the same predictions, they are pragmatically compatible. 

James's pragmatic method for resolving disputes is a closely related predecessor to the Chalmers factoring.

> Both theories have shown all their consequences and, by the hypothesis we are adopting, these are identical. The pragmatist must consequently say that the two theories, in spite of their different-sounding names, mean exactly the same thing, and that **the dispute is purely verbal.**

# Chalmers 2011

[Link to PDF](./Chalmers2011.pdf)

A verbal dispute for our purposes is any dispute in which, were a party to sufficiently break down or specify in more exact terms what they mean, or what their stance is, the other party would agree. Thus "He is tall" needs to be de-vague-ified by saying "I believe he is in at least the 80th percentile for height in this town." This statement has a fact of the matter that "He is tall" does not.

This is not too different from one of Hirsch's core carvings: "A dispute over the truth of S is verbal if S is definitionally equivalent to S 1 for one party and definitionally equivalent to S 2 for the other, and the parties agree on the truth-values of S 1 and S 2." So, if I am arguing "He is tall", I may mean it as approximately upper 50th percentile of height, and you might mean it as approximately upper 25th percentile, but we might well both agree that the subject in question is in the upper 50th percentile, even if we still disagree on whether he is "tall."

For some strange reason Chalmers rejects this.

> This is a reasonable heuristic to use in detecting the presence of a verbal dispute, and it plausibly yields a sufficient condition, at least if we set aside cases in which the parties’ agreement over S 1 or S 2 is merely verbal. But this criterion does not plausibly yield a necessary condition. Many expressions do not have clear definitional analyses, so that there will be no S 1 and S 2 available, but a dispute involving these expressions may be verbal all the same.
>
> Consider the following passage from _Moby Dick_:
>
> *I take the good old fashioned ground that the whale is a fish, and call upon holy Jonah to back me. This fundamental thing settled, the next point is, in what internal respect does the whale differ from other fish. Above, Linnaeus has given you those items. But in brief they are these: lungs and warm blood; whereas all other fish are lungless and cold blooded.*
> 
> Here, there is a clear sense in which Ishmael and Linnaeus do not or at least need not differ on the nonlinguistic issues. For example, Ishmael and Linnaeus might agree that whales are like typical fish in their superficial qualities, while they are like mammals in various biological respects that are relevant for scientific purposes. They simply differ on the broadly verbal matter of whether to use ‘fish’ for the superficial kind or the scientific kind.

But the situation seemed perfectly relevant to my eyes. Let’s look. S: *A whale is not a mammal but a fish*. S1, believed by Linnaeus to be the meaning of *S*: *A whale is not a member of my class mammalia, which is defined by hair, and breastmilk, and viviparity, but a member of the class pisces*. Now S2, believed by Ishmael to be the meaning of S (ostensibly; we would have to ask him to represent himself; his definition is not as formal as that of Linnaeus): *The whale is a fish in the sense the Bible says it is a fish.* There is still something fishy here: It seems likely that Ishmael would insist there’s an “essential fishiness” that exists in all whales and fish, because he is a Biblical man who believes in essences. To this point Linnaeus may or may not concede; I do not know enough about his religiosity or metaphysical beliefs. If Linnaeus does not believe there is an “essential fishyness” then I do not believe this is a verbal dispute; a reference to essence is a reference to rock-bottom. If he agrees then it is, by the Hirsch definition, a verbal dispute. In either case, the “test” does not break here the way Chalmers seems to think it does.

So he goes on to try a lot of definitions that are significantly worse. In the process, he gets increasingly confused, e.g. the narrow and unhelpful: “A dispute over S is verbal iff S expresses distinct propositions p and q for the two parties, so that one party asserts p and the other denies q, and the parties agree on the truth of p and ¬q.”

Things get better when we get to the “heuristic” for getting around verbal disputes: the “elimination method.” If that sounds familiar, it’s because it’s “Taboo Your Words” in broad strokes. How novel is this method? While he concedes that the general idea of verbal disputes, and clusters of strategies for handling them, are “common” in contemporary philosophical discourse, the elimination methodology he lays out has not yet been “explicitly” factored; moreover, the concept of elimination he expects to be unfamiliar enough to his readers that he advises them to "proceed to the next section for illustrations drawn from philosophy" before coming back to the abstract description of the process.

Chalmers’ conclusion: “[[Rudolf Carnap|Carnap]] and other logical empiricists hoped to provide methods to clarify and resolve philosophical disputes once and for all. I have not provided anything like that. Still, the method I have outlined has the potential to clarify many or most philosophical disputes, and to resolve some of them. It will certainly not resolve them all, but it often gets us closer to the heart of the dispute, and leaves us with a clearer understanding of the fundamental issues underlying a dispute and of what remains to be resolved. That is a form of philosophical progress.” Two assertions have been made by Chalmers that I will let stand, as he certainly has more authority on what [[Rudolf Carnap|Carnap]] and the logical empiricists were up to. He seems to think it’s meaningfully different from what he’s up to, and also that what he’s up to is a “form of philosophical progress” that will help “clarify many or most philosophical disputes.” This is almost identical to the spirit with which “Taboo Your Words” was advanced.

One argument rationalists have made is that many respected philosophers whose work is taken seriously nonetheless regularly err in believe there is some metaphysical “fact” of the matter about what an abstract concept like “meaning” or “belief” *really is* (independent, say, from descriptive facts about how it is used in the world, or how its use is prescribed by authorities). This is commonly considered a strawman by proponents of mainstream philosophy in such debates. Chalmers, however, is firmly on the side of the rationalists, both in his diagnosis of, and prescription for, philosophy. Philosophers, Chalmers writes,

*often say: “I don’t care about the concept of X. I care about what X* really *is. Even though X1 doesn’t mirror our concept of X, X really is X1.” For example, when Ruth Millikan (1983, 73) gives her teleological theory of meaning, she says that she is not analyzing the concept of meaning, and that she is instead giving a theory about the natural nature of meaning. Likewise, when Hilary Kornblith (2002, 1-2) gives his naturalistic account of knowledge, he says that he is not analyzing the concept of knowledge, and is instead giving an account of knowledge itself. I think these proposals about what X “really is” are often implausible.*

Note these examples are both relatively recent and relatively well-respected in the field, and Chalmers’ devotes an entire section of his paper to an almost blanket refutation of their positions. Interesting, [[Eliezer Yudkowsky|Yudkowsky]] is comparatively tame in his judgment; he writes, in “Dissolving Questions,” “Many philosophers—particularly amateur philosophers, and ancient philosophers—share a dangerous instinct: If you give them a question, they try to answer it.” (By this he is referring to philosophers putting on “blinders” and answering the question as if it has one right answer, as opposed to have multiple right answers depending on the “sense” one takes it as asking.)

Kevin Schaarp: "[[Wittgenstein]]: the aim of philosophy is to show the fly the way out of the fly bottle. Philosophical problems are manifestations of being trapped by our language, and philosophy should take the form of therapy that ultimately *dissolves* the philosophical problems."

What’s Eliezer’s representation of the discourse?

Some philosophers are wise enough to recall the warning that most philosophical disputes are really disputes over the meaning of a word, or confusions generated by using different meanings for the same word in different places. So they try to define very precisely what they mean by "free will", and then ask again, "Do we have free will? Yes or no?"

A philosopher wiser yet, may suspect that the confusion about "free will" shows the notion itself is flawed. So they pursue the Traditional Rationalist course: They argue that "free will" is inherently self-contradictory, or meaningless because it has no testable consequences. And then they publish these devastating observations in a prestigious philosophy journal.

What we are left with, [[Eliezer Yudkowsky|Yudkowsky]] writes, is a fact about human psychology: people believe they have free will, i.e. there is a "cognitive algorithm" behind it. These cognitive algorithms are "the way the world feels." As our intuitions are essentially feelings, the critique is that our intuitions are not valid evidence about the world, as philosophy has traditionally held. They are merely evidence as to how humans' cognitive algorithms run. (Eliezer goes on to argue cases such as the “dangling unit” example, to show how we should assume that there are features of any computation system which do not “exist” in the dataset, but I will not go into those arguments here.)

**BOUNTY: THE ABOVE ARGUMENT ABOUT INTUITION AND ALGORITHMS AS FEELINGS.**

Conceptual pluralism—that there are typically multiple concepts or "roles" in the "vicinity" of contested philosophical terms like "free will," which lead us into verbal disputes—he argues should be the "default view for most philosophical expressions." Much like [[Eliezer Yudkowsky|Yudkowsky]], he believes we ought to focus on the function or purpose (“role”) of a particular definition in our inquiry, as it will be more productive than asking questions about identity (what “really” is).

Strangely, Chalmers gets very stuck up on the question of deontology and consequentialism:

"Say that a Kantian and a consequentialist disagree about when an act is right. The Kantian holds that an act is right iff it has a certain deontological property, while the consequentialist holds that an act is right iff it has a certain consequence property... Should we likewise diagnose a verbal dispute here? Intuitively, the answer is no. For all we have said, moral disputes are substantive disputes."

There are multiple senses of "right"; one is the deontologist's, one is the consequentialist's, and each believes that one kind is what people ought to do in order to be moral. Were we not to have a concept "moral" or "right" and have a concept "best according to doctrine" and "best according to phenomenal outcome," we would have a situation where one philosopher believes people ought to behave according to the former carving and another philosopher to the latter. Since prescriptions are tethered to outcomes (you cannot define a "should" unless you know the "in order to," i.e. all prescription is instrumental) there is no relevant fact of the matter or dispute, merely a disagreement about which outcomes the philosopher advocates humans pursue. In my mind, Chalmers has made a serious error, and does not fully understand the way words have warped his mind & discursive community.

Chalmers also echoes (though oddly without citation, as his framing is nearly identical—it was a collection, to be fair, Chalmers edited) the Karen Bennett argument of over a decade prior, that the question of whether composite objects (ie a "mereological whole"), or merely particles. Again he rules that whether a composite “exists” or not cannot be shown as a verbal dispute by his method.

Incidentally, [[Eliezer Yudkowsky|Yudkowsky]] has addressed a comparable issue:

> Yancy:  "Xannon, you are overcomplicating things.  1/3 apiece.  It's not that complicated.  A fair distribution is an even split, not a distribution arrived at by a 'fair resolution procedure' that everyone agrees on.  What if we'd all been raised in a society that believed that men should get twice as much pie as women?  Then we would split the pie unevenly, and even though no one of us disputed the split, it would still be unfair."
> 
> Xannon:  "What?  Where is this 'fairness' stored if not in human minds?  Who says that something is unfair if no intelligent agent does so?  Not upon the stars or the mountains is 'fairness' written."
> 
> Yancy:  "So what you're saying is that if you've got a whole society where women are chattel and men sell them like farm animals and it hasn't occurred to anyone that things could be other than they are, that this society is fair, and at the exact moment where someone first realizes it shouldn't have to be that way, the whole society suddenly becomes unfair."

Here, there is a disagreement over what is “fair,” much like the disagreement between the deontologist and the consequentialist over what is “right.” Yancy, Xannon, and Zaire are deciding what is a fair allocation of a pie. Yancy has proposed [[bundling|splitting]] by thirds, while Zaire has decided he wants half the pie and that it is fair he should get it.

> Zaire:  "I fear I must accord with Yancy on one point, Xannon; your desire for perfect accord among us is misguided.  I want half the pie.  Yancy wants me to have a third of the pie.  This is all there is to the world, and all there ever was.  If two monkeys want the same banana, in the end one will have it, and the other will cry morality.  Who gets to form the committee to decide the rules that will be used to determine what is 'fair'?  Whoever it is, got the banana."

So, “fair” is a concept whose specifications—what is seen as fair vs. unfair—is highly dependent on cultural and individual context. Big surprise! This is just how abstract concepts work. The only facts of the matter are whether the “algorithm” in each individual’s mind would “feel” a situation was fair or unfair, whether an adjudicating body would have either a majority/consensus “feeling” they could agree on, or whether an adjudicating body could rule based on a formalized definition of “fairness.” But until that definition is formalized, there can be no fact of the matter, because there is no fact about what “fair” is—only the fact of how it is constituted in the algorithms of individual minds. Moreover, [[Eliezer Yudkowsky|Yudkowsky]] argues, concepts like "fair" or "right" are tactics individuals and groups have evolved for negotiating for more access to resources, or particular outcomes.

We may not “buy” this argument for a host of reasons, but it is not an argument or framing apparent to Chalmers, writing even as he does *after* the time of sequences. (One wonders why the burden is not on him to cite & refute [[Eliezer Yudkowsky|Yudkowsky]], other than the norms of a philosophical community which exists primarily to advance the interests of its own members, i.e., not [[Eliezer Yudkowsky|Yudkowsky]].)

> Yancy:  "What is _fair_ is one question, and whether someone else _accepts_ that this is fair is another question.  What is fair?  That's easy: an equal division of the pie is fair.  Anything else won't be fair no matter what kind of pretty arguments you put around it.  Even if I _gave_ Zaire a sixth of my pie, that might be a _voluntary_ division but it wouldn't be a _fair_ division.  Let _fairness_ be a simple and object-level procedure, instead of this infinite meta-recursion, and the buck will stop immediately."
> 
> Zaire:  "If the word 'fair' simply means 'equal division' then why not just say 'equal division' instead of this strange additional word, 'fair'?  You want the pie divided equally, I want half the pie for myself.  That's the whole fact of the matter; this word 'fair' is merely an attempt to get more of the pie for yourself."
> 
> Xannon:  "If that's the whole fact of the matter, why would anyone talk about 'fairness' in the first place, I wonder?"
> 
> Zaire:  "Because they all share the same delusion."

Here, I give the win again to [[Eliezer Yudkowsky|Yudkowsky]]’s Sequences. It shows how a kind of substitution can happen—e.g. there is no disagreement about what “distribution of an identical quantity of an available resource to each individual” means, merely a disagreement about whether fairness means “proportionate distribution of an available resource,” His critique of the kinds of questions which are more-or-less verbal is wider in scope & challenge than Chalmers. Moreover, his evolutionary approach, where the only facts are organisms’ actions and their effects, gets us real traction in better understanding human behavior. Note, however, that “equal division” or “proportionate division” themselves are slippery; as one commenter on the Sequences points out, "what if Zaire has a bigger body and generally needs to eat more?" There are many similar cases where "fair" distribution is complex. Perhaps most people agree fairness is proportionate distribution, but proportionate to *what* remains contentious. Many philosophers have in fact carved out what "fair" means; the field is known as "procedural justice." Predictably, each philosopher has a different conception of the fair. Can any be “right,” in a meaningful way, in any other sense than "according with what people mean by fairness"?

### Importing the "verbal disputes" frame into the problem of **Composites & Ambiguity**

Truth of statement: “*That* is water.” Does the pointed-at thing match the membership criteria entailed (intended to entail) by the sense intended by the speaker? If I say “That is water” I almost certainly am making the claim implicitly that it is H2O. That is always precisely what I will mean by saying “That is water.” But perhaps a particularly Bacchic Greek tribe might say “That is water” and implicitly make the claim that it is [the substance they drink regularly that gets them drunk, which they call water because it is so essential to their lives]. The intended sense is the implicit criteria on which the statement is understood to be evaluated. The Greek’s claim has a set of implied criteria for its own evaluation different from my set. The Greek’s claim might, if he could articulate it, be that whatever gets him drunk and is a purple liquid is water. This might not be sufficient: there may be further senses, such as the taste or viscocity, which would lead him, upon the presentation of purple-dyed malt liquor, to reject its membership. This just means that the set of sensory criteria he uses he struggles to put into words. What happens when presented with honest-to-God wine that he rejects? Well now we’re just playing with definitions. The point is this Bacchic Greek can’t produce a coherent representation of his intention. He can produce that representation for us and we can evaluate it, but if he plays dumb and says the representation doesn’t capture what he means by “water,” we’ll have to grant we can’t prove the thing he’s pointing to isn’t what he thinks water is.

From Karen Bennett 2007, "Composition, Colocation, and Metaontology":

> Hirsch says that a dispute is verbal when the disputed sentences—whether (at the bar) ‘there is a martini on the table’ or (in the philosophy room) ‘there is a table’—are most charitably understood as having different truth conditions in the mouths of the disputants, so that both sides speak truly, despite uttering sentences that appear to contradict each other (2005, 72). He thus offers the following as a necessary condition on a dispute’s being verbal: “each side ought to acknowledge that there is a plausibly charitable interpretation of the language associated with the other side’s position which will make that position come out true” (2005, 82). He further offers the following as the “simplest paradigm” for meeting that necessary condition:
>
> _(H) a dispute over the truth of a sentence D is merely verbal if “there are two undisputed sentences U1 and U2, one true and one false, such that one side holds that D is (a priori necessarily) equivalent to U1 and the other side holds that D is equivalent to U2” (2005, 83)._
>
> Note that (H) is explicitly supposed to be sufficient, not necessary (2005, 83); it is a way of guaranteeing that the necessary condition is met.
> 
> In the martini case, we are supposing that a classic V-shaped glass filled with a noxious green concoction sits on the table in front of us. The disputed sentence D is ‘there is a martini on the table’. The undisputedly true sentence U1 is ‘there is an alcoholic cocktail in a V-shaped glass on the table’, and the undisputedly false sentence U2 is ‘there is a mixture of gin or vodka, dry vermouth, and olives on the table’. Purists like me take D to be equivalent to U2, and therefore say that D is false. People who run bars that claim to serve 50 kinds of martini take D to be equivalent to U1, and therefore claim that D is true. They are simply talking past each other.

But U1 and U2 merely remove [[ambiguity]], so that the terms are those with strong consensus as to their definitions. If the bartenders association make a big deal that a martini is and only is ever gin, vermuth, and olives, and everyone agrees on this definition, it becomes non-ambiguous in the sense that the vast majority of native speakers have a shared sense of what is meant. They are still not indisputedly true or false; if I were to proclaim my definition of ‘alcohol’ meant any noxious intoxicating liquid (e.g. including turpentine), and enough native speakers started using my definition, we’d be in the exact same place. Hirsch has not solved anything; he’s merely pointed out a case where there is high ambiguity, and pointed out that sometimes, choosing lower-ambiguity “resting places” for language (“zoomed in” so to speak, or anchored to technical terms that we’re more prescriptive about) can clear up disagreement. This is "rather different from disputes about whether the Loch Ness monster exists, or whether there were weapons of mass destruction in Iraq," Hirsch tells us. Is it? If by “Loch Ness” I mean the long-standing legend, not specifically an aquatic living organism? “What is the Loch Ness?” “It’s a monster.” “Does a spirit haunting a lake count as a monster?” “What’s a spirit?” This is endless and pointless; the point is that this case is *not* meaningfully different other than in the extent to which we acknowledge a consensus definition.

Many cases in the real world are in fact verbal disputes in the [[ambiguity]] sense, where both speakers can settle on a low-ambiguity resolution that they’ve “summed up” or named or categorized differently.

“Does a table exist?” as a metaphysical question *is not* a case of [[ambiguity]] being able to find a resting place. “Is there a pattern of structure Americans call ‘table’ which appears to have some regularities of function or design?” That’s answerable: Yes, and one core, shared regularity is that its primary purpose is to put things—that are not humans—on top of it. But as we know, concepts are [[fuzzy]]; there are likely many exceptions or edge-cases, it is a *cluster in thingspace*. (It may even be multiple clusters in thingspace attached by analogy under one roof, one handle.)

*

There is an algorithm each of us uses to match, inductively and deductively, phenomena to handles. There are more formal or technical definitions (e.g. dictionaries) which correlate, with to varying degrees of fidelity, some averaging of aggregate uses (democratic, descriptivist) or else some average or reckoning or curation of expert algorithms (technocratic, prescriptivist). They are limited in their fidelity by individuals’ ability to describe, with language, what are typically sublinguistic processes of matching and discernment, but also by the mere fact that so many potential edgecases or possible complications exist that are unconsidered by a particular verbal description. It is strikingly similar to the problem of describing how neural networks make categorization decisions.

Sometimes, words are “multipolar” in that there are multiple meaningfully different senses, and the algorithm which will be used to separate matches from non-matches will be different depending on which sense the individual feels fits the situation. If I believe you mean *martini* in the strict sense, I will look for olives; if I believe you mean it in the loose sense of *mixed drink*, I’ll look for bright colors. (Obviously these search algorithms are gross simplifications.) In these cases, there can be no authority on the truth of whether an object “belongs” to a word, e.g. whether a rum and cola “belongs” to “martini.” Rather, the word “belongs” to an unknowable algorithm within the mind of the word’s speaker; it is bestowed only upon this algorithm’s positive matches; and there is no matter of whether an utterance like “That is a martini” is true or false—only a matter of whether each individual’s respective algorithms did or didn’t identify a match. There might be another sense of “truth,” which is the extent to which the algorithm’s determination aligns with society’s experts’ designation. That’s a useful sense of truth, but meaningfully distinct.

The truth senses of “There is a table in region R,”: “Table” unlike “martini” is unipolar in the sense that there would be a tight clustering of matches/descriptions given if individuals were asked to define or find examples of it sans further context (similar to indexicality). Still, the core mechanism is the same: (1) There is a fact about whether my algorithm classifies anything in region R as a table. (2) There is a fact about whether experts, or a majority of native speakers, would agree. (3) There is a sense in which you could argue an utterance where the fact of (1) was true (did in fact classify), and the fact of (2) was false (others would not share my assessment) is meaningfully “true” or “false.” We’ll call (1) a subjective match and (2) an objective match. When someone makes a claim like “That is X,” or “X is Y,” they may either be making a claim that they believe it is a member (1), or that they believe it is classified by others as a member (2). If I say “That book is great,” I may be saying that “I consider” it great or that “it is considered” to be great.

In Bennet’s language, the D, U1, and U2… *D: There is a table in region R*. *U1: I posit that there is a subjective or objective match against my algorithm. U2: I posit that there is not a subjective or objective match against my algorithm.* Let us say that we are considering the dining table I am writing at now. I say, pointing, “That is a table.” I may be making some combination of the claim that it matches my own definitions, and also that it matches the general definition. On both counts, I would be descriptively correct; I believe that overwhelmingly the algorithm of my native speech community, or of relevant “experts,” would concur (we may define “general definition” with a significant deal of freedom, seeing as we are charge of such things).

> In the composition case, let the disputed sentence D be ‘there is a table in region R’. U1 is the undisputedly true ‘there are simples arranged tablewise in region R’. It is less clear what U2 is supposed to be—to what undisputedly false sentence does the nihilist take D to be equivalent? I assume that it is supposed to be something like ‘there is an extra object in front of me, completely independent of the simples’. (Bennett 2007)

The mistake is calling this ontology. (And everything else: the factoring is completely insane.) “Tables” are more elements of the map than a part of the territory.

An alien who wanted to learn what a table is might be exposed to many examples, and get some formal rules. Likely, he would make some different judgments on edge cases unless his training was impeccable. This is what happens every minute with human children. We get some examples, we maybe draw out some shared properties, apply them elsewhere, withdraw when corrected, notice others’ usages. But we never write a definition down, a set of clear criteria, and we’ll never find them, and for many terms we may never agree on them. Insofar as there is a Platonic “form” of a table it is a form unique to each individual; it exists inside heads, the abstract concept pulled from examples. “Does a table exist?” I don’t know, what do you mean?

Colocation:

Can things do multiple things simultaneously? Clearly. Are some things' identities determined largely or primarily by their function? Clearly (see: a table). Things also have many properties beyond function, including their arrangement in space, their material composition, etc. So a table leg can be "many things" in the sense that it can be a leg (spatial position/arrangement), a decoration (function), a support beam (function), and a piece of wood (material.)

> For example, in the case of the statue and the clay, Mnesarchus's original version assumes someone moulds a horse, then squashes it. We are asked to pick out the horse's shape or form. The act of squashing changes that shape into another relatively amorphous shape. The object changes its identity with respect to its shape. Mnesarchus said it would be reasonable to see this sequence of events as something coming into existence and then ceasing to exist. The most obvious thing changing is the horse shape that we name "statue."
> 
> By design, there is no change in the amount of clay, so the matter is identical over time with respect to the amount of clay. The clay persists.
> 
> We now claim to have seen a difference in persistence conditions. The object qua clay persists. The object qua statue goes in and out of existence.
> 
> But this is just a way of talking about what has happened because a human observer has "picked out" two different aspects of the one object. As the statue is being smashed beyond recognition, every part of the clay must move to a new position that accommodates the change in shape of the statue. There are changes in the clay with identical information to the change in the shape of the statue. These we ignore to set up the puzzle.
> 
> In more modern versions of the statue and clay puzzle, we can make a change in the matter, for example by breaking off an arm and replacing it with a new arm made of different material but restoring the shape. We ignore the change in form, although it was obviously a drastic change until the restoration, and we focus on the clay, making the claim that the original clay has ceased to exist and new clay come into existence.
> 
> In either case, the claim to see different persistence conditions is the result of focusing on different subsets of the total information.
> 
> When identity theorists say that the whole of one object and the whole of another can occupy just the same place at just the same time, they are never talking about two objects of the same type, kind, or sort. They are always "picking out" different aspects of a single object and giving them differing existential status.

Rota on “table” as phenomenological “recovery” or recognition.

> From this we are led, by an inevitable logic, to say that the table is not something physical; it's a pure identity. What we deal with in the world, the functions, have an identity rather than an existence. This identity is something that can be recovered by being remembered, visualized, forgotten, and what not—by being focused upon through different shots. This is a phenomenological law; this is the way it is. If you don't like it I'm sorry, but don't blame me!

*

Chalmers: *It is also worth noting that the meaning of a general term or a predicate should not simply be understood as its extension: two parties who disagree substantively over whether O.J. Simpson is a murderer will also disagree about the extension of ‘murderer’, but intuitively this does not disqualify them from agreeing on the term’s meaning.*

This feels problematic for the “table is what an algorithm matches to its conception of the table class.” Let’s see if it actually is.

My algorithm for “murderers” is less simple than it appears at first: There are cases of manslaughter that may be in question, as well as cases such as war. Let us say that, as this algorithm is more on the formalized side (has necessarily had to be, since it is used in law, whereas object recognition stuff like “is this a table” do not need to be as black and white), lets use the example criteria of, “Killed someone on purpose, i.e. made a deliberate decision knowing it would lead to a death.” Things are more complicated in reality, since, for instance, I might deliberately make a decision to kill a person holding up a bank, but this is the broad stroke: intentional killing. If you and I disagree whether OJ Simpson is a murderer, we might disagree on whether the evidence seems to indicate that he killed someone; we might disagree on whether it was intentional or by accident; and we might disagree on whether all intentional killings are murders. The first case, the evidence that he killed, is clearly not a verbal dispute. It is a case in which we have made a guess with limited facts as to what we believe is most likely. Neither is likely to be a serious factual claim in the sense of being sure. One is a probabilistic assessment of the evidence the subject has been exposed to which inclines them toward one hypothesis or another, both on the subject of whether OJ killed and whether the killing was intentional. We can have the same “this killing is of the class murder” algorithm while having a different “this killing is intentional” and “this killing was done by OJ” assessments. What does this mean? People privy to all facts would go, “that’s a killing” or, “that’s intentional.” Who are people: Most people, experts, me, whatever, who care. (BTW: Mental state and internal thoughts are facts about the world, David Deutsch proves this.) In this case, we add up lots of associative evidence to think maybe this event occurred, and maybe this event is thing we call killing, or murder. If we want to get into the real weeds about causality, how do we define killing? Impossible. “Something I did lead to your death”? Bah, that’s almost everything, if OJ had stayed home that day or whatever maybe she’s still alive, everyone’s responsible for determinism.

Chalmers, very important philosopher, very respected, he come up with big idea for us to get around verbal disputes. Key term elimination! Boy I never heard of that one. “An alternative heuristic for detecting and dealing with verbal disputes is what we might call the method of elimination. Here, the key idea is that one eliminates use of the key term, and one attempts to determine whether any substantive dispute remains.” Oh, wait, I did, “[Taboo Your Words](http://lesswrong.com/lw/nu/taboo_your_words)” which is like, 15 years old.

Patterns of component assembly (a set of relations, e.g. leg at 90deg angle from table surface) and components e.g. ‘legs’ and ‘tabletop’ which refer to their function as part of the whole, e.g. a thing that is materially identical to a table leg is, if it were never a part of a table nor intended for a table nor with a table in mind, just a piece of wood. (Or the component of whatever it was built for.) As soon as it is moved into the assembly of a table, it becomes the “leg” of that table. “A leg” is defined by its function, and the material composition or origin is much less relevant. A house is a similar example, or a car. A bag of raisins is a bag filled with raisins; there can be many materials of a bag, so what matters is more its functional properties; there is a specified relationship between raisins and bag (former inside latter); and there are >1 raisins, which have a more specific and singular molecular composition, i.e. a pattern of component assembly & a pattern of components. (They will be raisins inside or outside the bag, and the bag will be a bag with or without the raisins, but we can call “a bag of raisins” a thing if we want to.)

Margolis & Laurence offer a rebuttal to Chalmers in the SEP entry to "Concepts":

Of course, it is possible to introduce new theoretical terms (“concepts1”, “concepts2”, and “concepts3”) for the different theoretical posits made by the different approaches we have been considering (the ability view, the mental representation view, and the abstract object view), and then reconstruct the debate regarding these different approaches as a merely terminological disagreement about which of these terms we should use. But notice that it is possible to do the same thing even for clear-cut substantive debates. For example, we could introduce new terms for moral goodness as understood by deontologists (“good1”) and as understood by consequentialists (“good2”), and then reconstruct the debate about what moral goodness consists in as a merely terminological disagreement about which term we should use, “good1” or “good2”. Or we could introduce “human1” for humans as understood by standard evolutionary accounts (according to which humans have nonhuman primate ancestors) and “human2” for humans understood by creationists (according to which they don't), and reconstruct the debate between these different approaches as a merely terminological issue about which term we should use, “human1” or “human2”. The danger, of course, is that this would drain the very idea of a merely terminological debate of its utility and obscure very real differences between different sorts of disagreements (e.g., stipulative vs. substantive) that would all end up counting as “merely terminological”.