# Croce 1994: Discussing the Undiscussable

Croce is a dance critic, writing for the New Yorker, arguing that visual and [[conceptual art]] has become overtaken by a spectacle of victimhood:

> The thing that _Still/Here_ makes immediately apparent, whether you see it or not, is that victimhood is a kind of mass delusion that has taken hold of previously responsible sectors of our culture. The preferred medium of victimhood-something that Jones acknowledges-is videotape (see TV at almost any hour of the day), but the cultivation of victimhood by institutions devoted to the care of art is a menace to all art forms, particularly performing-art forms. In writing this piece, I enter a plea for the critic and risk being taken for a victim myself. But the critic is part of the audience for art that victimhood also threatens. I can't review someone I feel sorry for or hopeless about. As a dance critic, I've learned to avoid dancers with obvious problems-overweight dancers (not fat dancers; Jackie Gleason was fat and was a good dancer), old dancers, dancers with sickled feet or dancers with physical deformities who appear nightly in roles requiring beauty of line. In quite another category of undiscussability are those dancers I'm forced to feel sorry for because of the way they present themselves: as dissed blacks, abused women or disfranchised homosexuals-as performers, in short, who make out of victimhood victim art. I can live with the flabby, the feeble, the scoliotic. But with the righteous I cannot function at all. The strategies of victim artists are proliferating marvellously at the moment. There's no doubt that the public likes to see victims, if only to patronize them with applause.

> When a victim artist finds his or her public, a perfect, mutually manipulative union is formed which no critic may put asunder.

> Where it all began is not difficult to see. The arts bureaucracy in this country, which includes government and private funding agencies, has in recent years demonstrated a [[selection|blatant bias]] for utilitarian art-art that justifies the bureaucracy's existence by being socially useful. [...] By the late eighties, the ethos of community outreach had reached out and swallowed everything else; it was the only way the N.E.A. could survive.

> But [[ideology]] had something to do with this. When even museum directors can talk about "using art" to meet this or that social need, you know that disinterested art has become an anathema. (Disinterested art: you have to understand that there's no such thing.) The ideological boosters of utilitarian art hark back to the political crusades of the sixties-against Vietnam, for civil rights. [[the sixties]], in turn, harked back to the proletarian thirties, when big-government bureaucracy began.

Victim art is beyond criticism, insofar as it asks and sinks down our sympathies more than it demands—rises to meet—our challenges:

> I'm not sure who came first: Jones the AIDS victim or Mapplethorpe the AIDS victim. But Jones and Mapplethorpe, parallel self-declared cases of pathology in art, have effectively disarmed criticism. They're not so much above art as beyond it. The need for any further evaluation, formal or otherwise, has been discredited. Where will it go from here? If an artist paints a picture in his own blood, what does it matter if I think it's not a very good picture? If he mixes the blood with Day-Glo colours, who will criticize him?