# EconTalk 2021: Virginia Postrel on Textiles and the Fabric of Civilization

> you take a pair of jeans, which, in the scheme of things is not that much fabric. Pair of jeans, to weave that amount of fabric, takes about six miles of thread. Six miles of thread is a lot of thread. And, nowadays, you can spin in a modern spinning plant that amount of thread in a few seconds. But in the pre-Industrial Revolution period, the very fastest, best spinners in the world were in India; and they could spend 100 meters of thread an hour.
> that means that it would take about 13 days, 13 eight-hour days, to spin the amount of thread in a pair of jeans. And, that's before you weave it, it's before you dye it. That's just for the spinning; and it doesn't include all the cleaning, and harvesting, and any of that.
> one thing that you learn when you study textiles is how incredibly important friction is, because it's all held together basically with friction
> So, the Luddites were--the actual Luddites who used that term--were people who, men who were making really good money weaving on handlooms, not powered. And, when powered looms came in, they feared unemployment, and their wages went down, and they were not happy, and they started busting up looms. But, what's interesting to me about the Luddites is they are late-comers. Because, long before the Luddite—the Luddites are these great beneficiaries of the industrial production of thread... Thread used to be the bottleneck. There was a shortage of thread compared to the amount of cloth that could be woven, because people were spinning all the time making as much thread as they could and it was never enough, it was never enough... and then the weavers started to make a lot of money. So, when industrial spinning came in, there were, I guess we could call them proto-Luddites. There were people who were busting up those machines too, and attacking them... And, then later when the Jacquard looms came in, in France, which at the time were considered a great advance because you could make complex patterns very easily all of a sudden, but at first, the weavers in Lyon, which was the great French textile center, ran Monsieur Jacquard out of town, even though he was honored by the government and such. Because they were afraid for their livelihoods.
> if you look around the world and through history, at most garments, they are not tailored. They are not cut into little pieces. Like I mentioned, kente cloth, and I said, it was worn like a toga. You could take a sari. These are rectangular pieces of fabric that are draped. Or a kimono is made of [[rectangle vision|rectangles]]. And, in fact, peasant clothing in Europe, if you think about a classic—you have to get a picture in your head, but you think about a, sort of a medieval or early modern painting of peasants in the field, and the woman has a wide skirt. Well, that's basically a rectangle that's been sewn into a circle and gathered... so, you haven't wasted any fabric.

# Textile as etymology
A tenterhook is a barbed device added to a weaving warp, to maintain even tension—thus to be on tenterhooks is to be held in suspense. Words for disintegration, like fray, frazzle, and unravel come from weaving. Storytellers can "lose the thread"; programming languages and Internet forums alike are "threaded"—a thread being a single track over time, multi-threading referring to synchronicity or operation in parallel. We "spin"—in the symbolic [[framing|conceptualization]] sense—straw into gold like the miller's daughter, in Rumpelstiltskin.

The Fates would snip an individual's thread when his time was up. The Sioux Indians have a myth that a woman sits, with her dog and a boiling pot, slowly weaving; that when she is done, the end of the world will come. 

## Postrel 2021: The Fabric of Civilization

> To *weave* is to devise, to invent—to contrive function and beauty from the simplest of elements. In *The Odyssey*, when Athena and Odysseus scheme, they “weave a plan.” *Fabric* and *fabricate* share a common Latin root, *fabrica*: “something skillfully produced.” *Text* and *textile* are similarly related, from the verb *texere*, “to weave,” which in turn derives—as does *techne*—from the Indo-European word *teks*, meaning “to weave.” *Order* comes from the Latin word for setting warp threads, *ordior*, as does the French word for computer, *ordinateur*... 
> Such associations aren’t uniquely European. In the K’iche’ Maya language, the terms for weaving designs and writing hieroglyphics both use the root *-tz’iba-.* The Sanskrit word *sutra*, which now refers to a literary aphorism or religious scripture, originally denoted string or thread; the word *tantra*, which refers to a Hindu or Buddhist religious text, is from the Sanskrit *tantrum*, meaning “warp” or “loom.” The Chinese word *zuzhi*, meaning “organization” or “arrange,” is also the word for *weave*, while *chengji*, meaning “achievement” or “result,” originally meant twisting fibers together

## Kruger: Clues and Cloth
> In English many words exist that connect cloth-making with storytelling, testifying to centuries of our experience at the loom. Like a piece of fabric, a written or spoken story may be spun, woven, knitted, quilted, sewn, or pieced together. We talk about the 'fabric' of our society when characterising our collective ideas. Our thoughts and emotions can 'unravel', 'tangle', or 'fray'. Sometimes our ideas have too many 'loose ends', a term that originally meant something woven but not yet tied off the loom and in danger of falling apart. When we describe work or thoughts as 'shoddy', we are using a word that once referred to poorly woven material sold at greatly reduced prices. Someone dreamy or inattentive is said to be 'woolgathering', which alludes to the actual profession of a woolgatherer who appeared to wander aimlessly through the fields, gathering tufts of wool from the branches and bushes that flocks rubbed against while grazing.

"Clue" comes from the Anglo-Saxon _cliwen_, a ball of yarn. The meaning derives from the myth of Theseus and the Minotaur, specifically Ariadne's advice to find one's way out via a ball of yarn. OED: clue as "a fact, circumstance, or principle which, being taken hold of and followed up, leads through a maze, perplexity, difficulty, intricate investigation, etc." Chaucer, "The Legend of Ariadne" (1385):

*And for the hous is krynkeled to and fro,
And hath so queynte weyes for to go ―
For it is shapen as the mase is wrought ―
Therto have I a remedye in my thought,
That, by a clewe of twyn, as he hath gon,
The same weye he may returne anon,
Folwynge alwey the thred as he hath come.
     translation:
And because that dwelling-place winds much in and out, and has such intricate paths ― for it is shaped like a maze ― and for this I have in mind a remedy, that by means of a ball of twine he may directly return the way he went, following the thread continually.*
