_The Lonely Crowd_: 1950 sociology book, analyzing tradition vs. self-direction, consumerism, and the emerging middle class.

_The Man in the Gray Flannel Suit_: 1955 novel concerned with search for meaning amidst midcentury material and business culture.

# Greer 2020: On Living in the Boomers' Shadow

>  If the politicians and public intellectuals of the 1950s were a more sober and self-consciously responsible bunch than the leading lights of the twenties, this was only because they had been chastened by experience. The disillusioned and immature avant-garde of the twenties was the disillusioned and mature old guard of the fifties. Maturity had been forced on them by events, but their disillusionment had not changed. Public life still dwelt in the shadow of the Great War. No one believed that the old order that dissolved in 1914 had been reconstituted or replaced. The liberal elite felt, as they had thirty years earlier, that religious faith had been hollowed out by advances in science. That religious passion had been watered down by the demands of pluralism. That politics had been reduced to bland technocracy. That ideology was dead. That individuality was stripped away by specialization and corporate hierarchy. That booze, glamor, and dollar bills were the only salves left to the modern soul. 

> The 1950s did not seem like an age of innocent idyll or bland conformity to the adults who lived through it. It was a decade when intellectual life was still attempting to come to terms with the horrors of World War II and the Holocaust. Consider a few famous book titles:  Orwell's 1984 (published 1949), Hersey's The Wall (1950), Arendt's The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951), Chambers' Witness (1952), Miller's The Crucible (1953), Bradbury's Fahrenheit 451 (1953), Golding's Lord of the Flies (1954), Pasternak's Doctor Zhivago (1957), and Shirer's Rise and Fall of the Third Reich (1960) were all intensely preoccupied with the weaknesses of liberalism and the allure of totalitarian solutions.  For every optimistic summons to Tomorrowland, there was a Lionel Trilling, Reinhold Niebuhr, or Richard Hofstadter ready to declare Zion forever out of reach, hamstrung by the irony and tragedy of the American condition. Nor was it the wholesome era of memory. An age we associate with childlike obedience saw its children as anything but obedient—witness the anxiety of the age in films like The Wild One (1953), Rebel Without a Cause (1955), and Blackboard Jungle (1955). This age of innocence saw the inaugural issue of Playboy, the books Lolita (1955) and Peyton Pace (1956) hitting the New York Times Fiction best seller list, the Kinsey reports topping the Non-fiction best seller list, and Little Richard inaugurating rock 'n roll with the lyrics "Good Golly Miss Molly, sure like to ball / When you're rocking and rolling / Can't hear your mama call." And that is all without considering a lost war in Korea, the tension of the larger Cold War, and the tumult of the Civil Rights revolution. We may think of the 1950s as an age of conformity, purity, and stability, but those who lived through it as adults experienced it as an age of fragmentation, permissiveness, and shattered innocence.

> Douthat questions why we think post-modernism subversive so many decades after its invention; a Ross Douthat of 1959 would wonder why his fellow intellectuals still bandied about Freud as if he were a living danger. The Douthat of 2019 wonders why American political thought is stuck in the 1980s; the Douthat of 1959 would have traced the links that tie the technocratic Hooverism of the twenties with the technocratic liberalism of his own era. The Douthat of 2019 wonders why sexual ethics and fashion styles changed so drastically in the sixties and seventies but have been kept in stasis since; the Douthat of the 1950s would have marveled at the incredible changes in fashion and sentiment that occurred between 1905 and 1925 and wondered where all of the turn-of-the-century energy had disappeared to. 

> This Douthat would tell us how women who had worn no make up at all and five layers of dress in the 1910s wore but one or two layers of dress (and several layers of make up) in the twenties—just as their daughters would in the fifties. He would relate how after hemlines rose for a decade, they finally stabilized in the thirties—and stayed stable through 1960. Short haircuts shocked the world in 1921; how funny that they remained in vogue (if slightly different in style) in 1961.  An American from the 1955 wearing standard business attire could have walked into an office of 1925 without causing much drama; if a man of 1935 walked with his suit and hat into an office 1905 he would be received as a visitor from a different country.

> In many ways the 1950s is what you get when you take the uneven affluence of the 1920s and extend the boom out to the rest of the country. It was the prosperous disquiet of the Jazz Age delivered to Tallahassee and Pasadena.

